chapter i.     down the rabbit-hole
 chapter ii.    the pool of tears
 chapter iii.   a caucus-race and a long tale
 chapter iv.    the rabbit sends in a little bill
 chapter v.     advice from a caterpillar
 chapter vi.    pig and pepper
 chapter vii.   a mad tea-party
 chapter viii.  the queen’s croquet-ground
 chapter ix.    the mock turtle’s story
 chapter x.     the lobster quadrille
 chapter xi.    who stole the tarts?
 chapter xii.   alice’s evidence




chapter i.
down the rabbit-hole


alice was beginning to get very tired of sitting by her sister on the
bank, and of having nothing to do: once or twice she had peeped into
the book her sister was reading, but it had no pictures or
conversations in it, “and what is the use of a book,” thought alice
“without pictures or conversations?”

so she was considering in her own mind (as well as she could, for the
hot day made her feel very sleepy and stupid), whether the pleasure of
making a daisy-chain would be worth the trouble of getting up and
picking the daisies, when suddenly a white rabbit with pink eyes ran
close by her.

there was nothing so _very_ remarkable in that; nor did alice think it
so _very_ much out of the way to hear the rabbit say to itself, “oh
dear! oh dear! i shall be late!” (when she thought it over afterwards,
it occurred to her that she ought to have wondered at this, but at the
time it all seemed quite natural); but when the rabbit actually _took a
watch out of its waistcoat-pocket_, and looked at it, and then hurried
on, alice started to her feet, for it flashed across her mind that she
had never before seen a rabbit with either a waistcoat-pocket, or a
watch to take out of it, and burning with curiosity, she ran across the
field after it, and fortunately was just in time to see it pop down a
large rabbit-hole under the hedge.

in another moment down went alice after it, never once considering how
in the world she was to get out again.

the rabbit-hole went straight on like a tunnel for some way, and then
dipped suddenly down, so suddenly that alice had not a moment to think
about stopping herself before she found herself falling down a very
deep well.

either the well was very deep, or she fell very slowly, for she had
plenty of time as she went down to look about her and to wonder what
was going to happen next. first, she tried to look down and make out
what she was coming to, but it was too dark to see anything; then she
looked at the sides of the well, and noticed that they were filled with
cupboards and book-shelves; here and there she saw maps and pictures
hung upon pegs. she took down a jar from one of the shelves as she
passed; it was labelled “orange marmalade”, but to her great
disappointment it was empty: she did not like to drop the jar for fear
of killing somebody underneath, so managed to put it into one of the
cupboards as she fell past it.

“well!” thought alice to herself, “after such a fall as this, i shall
think nothing of tumbling down stairs! how brave they’ll all think me
at home! why, i wouldn’t say anything about it, even if i fell off the
top of the house!” (which was very likely true.)

down, down, down. would the fall _never_ come to an end? “i wonder how
many miles i’ve fallen by this time?” she said aloud. “i must be
getting somewhere near the centre of the earth. let me see: that would
be four thousand miles down, i think—” (for, you see, alice had learnt
several things of this sort in her lessons in the schoolroom, and
though this was not a _very_ good opportunity for showing off her
knowledge, as there was no one to listen to her, still it was good
practice to say it over) “—yes, that’s about the right distance—but
then i wonder what latitude or longitude i’ve got to?” (alice had no
idea what latitude was, or longitude either, but thought they were nice
grand words to say.)

presently she began again. “i wonder if i shall fall right _through_
the earth! how funny it’ll seem to come out among the people that walk
with their heads downward! the antipathies, i think—” (she was rather
glad there _was_ no one listening, this time, as it didn’t sound at all
the right word) “—but i shall have to ask them what the name of the
country is, you know. please, ma’am, is this new zealand or australia?”
(and she tried to curtsey as she spoke—fancy _curtseying_ as you’re
falling through the air! do you think you could manage it?) “and what
an ignorant little girl she’ll think me for asking! no, it’ll never do
to ask: perhaps i shall see it written up somewhere.”

down, down, down. there was nothing else to do, so alice soon began
talking again. “dinah’ll miss me very much to-night, i should think!”
(dinah was the cat.) “i hope they’ll remember her saucer of milk at
tea-time. dinah my dear! i wish you were down here with me! there are
no mice in the air, i’m afraid, but you might catch a bat, and that’s
very like a mouse, you know. but do cats eat bats, i wonder?” and here
alice began to get rather sleepy, and went on saying to herself, in a
dreamy sort of way, “do cats eat bats? do cats eat bats?” and
sometimes, “do bats eat cats?” for, you see, as she couldn’t answer
either question, it didn’t much matter which way she put it. she felt
that she was dozing off, and had just begun to dream that she was
walking hand in hand with dinah, and saying to her very earnestly,
“now, dinah, tell me the truth: did you ever eat a bat?” when suddenly,
thump! thump! down she came upon a heap of sticks and dry leaves, and
the fall was over.

alice was not a bit hurt, and she jumped up on to her feet in a moment:
she looked up, but it was all dark overhead; before her was another
long passage, and the white rabbit was still in sight, hurrying down
it. there was not a moment to be lost: away went alice like the wind,
and was just in time to hear it say, as it turned a corner, “oh my ears
and whiskers, how late it’s getting!” she was close behind it when she
turned the corner, but the rabbit was no longer to be seen: she found
herself in a long, low hall, which was lit up by a row of lamps hanging
from the roof.

there were doors all round the hall, but they were all locked; and when
alice had been all the way down one side and up the other, trying every
door, she walked sadly down the middle, wondering how she was ever to
get out again.

suddenly she came upon a little three-legged table, all made of solid
glass; there was nothing on it except a tiny golden key, and alice’s
first thought was that it might belong to one of the doors of the hall;
but, alas! either the locks were too large, or the key was too small,
but at any rate it would not open any of them. however, on the second
time round, she came upon a low curtain she had not noticed before, and
behind it was a little door about fifteen inches high: she tried the
little golden key in the lock, and to her great delight it fitted!

alice opened the door and found that it led into a small passage, not
much larger than a rat-hole: she knelt down and looked along the
passage into the loveliest garden you ever saw. how she longed to get
out of that dark hall, and wander about among those beds of bright
flowers and those cool fountains, but she could not even get her head
through the doorway; “and even if my head would go through,” thought
poor alice, “it would be of very little use without my shoulders. oh,
how i wish i could shut up like a telescope! i think i could, if i only
knew how to begin.” for, you see, so many out-of-the-way things had
happened lately, that alice had begun to think that very few things
indeed were really impossible.

there seemed to be no use in waiting by the little door, so she went
back to the table, half hoping she might find another key on it, or at
any rate a book of rules for shutting people up like telescopes: this
time she found a little bottle on it, (“which certainly was not here
before,” said alice,) and round the neck of the bottle was a paper
label, with the words “drink me,” beautifully printed on it in large
letters.

it was all very well to say “drink me,” but the wise little alice was
not going to do _that_ in a hurry. “no, i’ll look first,” she said,
“and see whether it’s marked ‘_poison_’ or not”; for she had read
several nice little histories about children who had got burnt, and
eaten up by wild beasts and other unpleasant things, all because they
_would_ not remember the simple rules their friends had taught them:
such as, that a red-hot poker will burn you if you hold it too long;
and that if you cut your finger _very_ deeply with a knife, it usually
bleeds; and she had never forgotten that, if you drink much from a
bottle marked “poison,” it is almost certain to disagree with you,
sooner or later.

however, this bottle was _not_ marked “poison,” so alice ventured to
taste it, and finding it very nice, (it had, in fact, a sort of mixed
flavour of cherry-tart, custard, pine-apple, roast turkey, toffee, and
hot buttered toast,) she very soon finished it off.

*      *      *      *      *      *      *

    *      *      *      *      *      *

*      *      *      *      *      *      *


“what a curious feeling!” said alice; “i must be shutting up like a
telescope.”

and so it was indeed: she was now only ten inches high, and her face
brightened up at the thought that she was now the right size for going
through the little door into that lovely garden. first, however, she
waited for a few minutes to see if she was going to shrink any further:
she felt a little nervous about this; “for it might end, you know,”
said alice to herself, “in my going out altogether, like a candle. i
wonder what i should be like then?” and she tried to fancy what the
flame of a candle is like after the candle is blown out, for she could
not remember ever having seen such a thing.

after a while, finding that nothing more happened, she decided on going
into the garden at once; but, alas for poor alice! when she got to the
door, she found she had forgotten the little golden key, and when she
went back to the table for it, she found she could not possibly reach
it: she could see it quite plainly through the glass, and she tried her
best to climb up one of the legs of the table, but it was too slippery;
and when she had tired herself out with trying, the poor little thing
sat down and cried.

“come, there’s no use in crying like that!” said alice to herself,
rather sharply; “i advise you to leave off this minute!” she generally
gave herself very good advice, (though she very seldom followed it),
and sometimes she scolded herself so severely as to bring tears into
her eyes; and once she remembered trying to box her own ears for having
cheated herself in a game of croquet she was playing against herself,
for this curious child was very fond of pretending to be two people.
“but it’s no use now,” thought poor alice, “to pretend to be two
people! why, there’s hardly enough of me left to make _one_ respectable
person!”

soon her eye fell on a little glass box that was lying under the table:
she opened it, and found in it a very small cake, on which the words
“eat me” were beautifully marked in currants. “well, i’ll eat it,” said
alice, “and if it makes me grow larger, i can reach the key; and if it
makes me grow smaller, i can creep under the door; so either way i’ll
get into the garden, and i don’t care which happens!”

she ate a little bit, and said anxiously to herself, “which way? which
way?”, holding her hand on the top of her head to feel which way it was
growing, and she was quite surprised to find that she remained the same
size: to be sure, this generally happens when one eats cake, but alice
had got so much into the way of expecting nothing but out-of-the-way
things to happen, that it seemed quite dull and stupid for life to go
on in the common way.

so she set to work, and very soon finished off the cake.

*      *      *      *      *      *      *

    *      *      *      *      *      *

*      *      *      *      *      *      *




chapter ii.
the pool of tears


“curiouser and curiouser!” cried alice (she was so much surprised, that
for the moment she quite forgot how to speak good english); “now i’m
opening out like the largest telescope that ever was! good-bye, feet!”
(for when she looked down at her feet, they seemed to be almost out of
sight, they were getting so far off). “oh, my poor little feet, i
wonder who will put on your shoes and stockings for you now, dears? i’m
sure _i_ shan’t be able! i shall be a great deal too far off to trouble
myself about you: you must manage the best way you can;—but i must be
kind to them,” thought alice, “or perhaps they won’t walk the way i
want to go! let me see: i’ll give them a new pair of boots every
christmas.”

and she went on planning to herself how she would manage it. “they must
go by the carrier,” she thought; “and how funny it’ll seem, sending
presents to one’s own feet! and how odd the directions will look!

     _alice’s right foot, esq., hearthrug, near the fender,_ (_with
     alice’s love_).

oh dear, what nonsense i’m talking!”

just then her head struck against the roof of the hall: in fact she was
now more than nine feet high, and she at once took up the little golden
key and hurried off to the garden door.

poor alice! it was as much as she could do, lying down on one side, to
look through into the garden with one eye; but to get through was more
hopeless than ever: she sat down and began to cry again.

“you ought to be ashamed of yourself,” said alice, “a great girl like
you,” (she might well say this), “to go on crying in this way! stop
this moment, i tell you!” but she went on all the same, shedding
gallons of tears, until there was a large pool all round her, about
four inches deep and reaching half down the hall.

after a time she heard a little pattering of feet in the distance, and
she hastily dried her eyes to see what was coming. it was the white
rabbit returning, splendidly dressed, with a pair of white kid gloves
in one hand and a large fan in the other: he came trotting along in a
great hurry, muttering to himself as he came, “oh! the duchess, the
duchess! oh! won’t she be savage if i’ve kept her waiting!” alice felt
so desperate that she was ready to ask help of any one; so, when the
rabbit came near her, she began, in a low, timid voice, “if you please,
sir—” the rabbit started violently, dropped the white kid gloves and
the fan, and skurried away into the darkness as hard as he could go.

alice took up the fan and gloves, and, as the hall was very hot, she
kept fanning herself all the time she went on talking: “dear, dear! how
queer everything is to-day! and yesterday things went on just as usual.
i wonder if i’ve been changed in the night? let me think: was i the
same when i got up this morning? i almost think i can remember feeling
a little different. but if i’m not the same, the next question is, who
in the world am i? ah, _that’s_ the great puzzle!” and she began
thinking over all the children she knew that were of the same age as
herself, to see if she could have been changed for any of them.

“i’m sure i’m not ada,” she said, “for her hair goes in such long
ringlets, and mine doesn’t go in ringlets at all; and i’m sure i can’t
be mabel, for i know all sorts of things, and she, oh! she knows such a
very little! besides, _she’s_ she, and _i’m_ i, and—oh dear, how
puzzling it all is! i’ll try if i know all the things i used to know.
let me see: four times five is twelve, and four times six is thirteen,
and four times seven is—oh dear! i shall never get to twenty at that
rate! however, the multiplication table doesn’t signify: let’s try
geography. london is the capital of paris, and paris is the capital of
rome, and rome—no, _that’s_ all wrong, i’m certain! i must have been
changed for mabel! i’ll try and say ‘_how doth the little_—’” and she
crossed her hands on her lap as if she were saying lessons, and began
to repeat it, but her voice sounded hoarse and strange, and the words
did not come the same as they used to do:—

“how doth the little crocodile
    improve his shining tail,
and pour the waters of the nile
    on every golden scale!

“how cheerfully he seems to grin,
    how neatly spread his claws,
and welcome little fishes in
    with gently smiling jaws!”


“i’m sure those are not the right words,” said poor alice, and her eyes
filled with tears again as she went on, “i must be mabel after all, and
i shall have to go and live in that poky little house, and have next to
no toys to play with, and oh! ever so many lessons to learn! no, i’ve
made up my mind about it; if i’m mabel, i’ll stay down here! it’ll be
no use their putting their heads down and saying ‘come up again, dear!’
i shall only look up and say ‘who am i then? tell me that first, and
then, if i like being that person, i’ll come up: if not, i’ll stay down
here till i’m somebody else’—but, oh dear!” cried alice, with a sudden
burst of tears, “i do wish they _would_ put their heads down! i am so
_very_ tired of being all alone here!”

as she said this she looked down at her hands, and was surprised to see
that she had put on one of the rabbit’s little white kid gloves while
she was talking. “how _can_ i have done that?” she thought. “i must be
growing small again.” she got up and went to the table to measure
herself by it, and found that, as nearly as she could guess, she was
now about two feet high, and was going on shrinking rapidly: she soon
found out that the cause of this was the fan she was holding, and she
dropped it hastily, just in time to avoid shrinking away altogether.

“that _was_ a narrow escape!” said alice, a good deal frightened at the
sudden change, but very glad to find herself still in existence; “and
now for the garden!” and she ran with all speed back to the little
door: but, alas! the little door was shut again, and the little golden
key was lying on the glass table as before, “and things are worse than
ever,” thought the poor child, “for i never was so small as this
before, never! and i declare it’s too bad, that it is!”

as she said these words her foot slipped, and in another moment,
splash! she was up to her chin in salt water. her first idea was that
she had somehow fallen into the sea, “and in that case i can go back by
railway,” she said to herself. (alice had been to the seaside once in
her life, and had come to the general conclusion, that wherever you go
to on the english coast you find a number of bathing machines in the
sea, some children digging in the sand with wooden spades, then a row
of lodging houses, and behind them a railway station.) however, she
soon made out that she was in the pool of tears which she had wept when
she was nine feet high.

“i wish i hadn’t cried so much!” said alice, as she swam about, trying
to find her way out. “i shall be punished for it now, i suppose, by
being drowned in my own tears! that _will_ be a queer thing, to be
sure! however, everything is queer to-day.”

just then she heard something splashing about in the pool a little way
off, and she swam nearer to make out what it was: at first she thought
it must be a walrus or hippopotamus, but then she remembered how small
she was now, and she soon made out that it was only a mouse that had
slipped in like herself.

“would it be of any use, now,” thought alice, “to speak to this mouse?
everything is so out-of-the-way down here, that i should think very
likely it can talk: at any rate, there’s no harm in trying.” so she
began: “o mouse, do you know the way out of this pool? i am very tired
of swimming about here, o mouse!” (alice thought this must be the right
way of speaking to a mouse: she had never done such a thing before, but
she remembered having seen in her brother’s latin grammar, “a mouse—of
a mouse—to a mouse—a mouse—o mouse!”) the mouse looked at her rather
inquisitively, and seemed to her to wink with one of its little eyes,
but it said nothing.

“perhaps it doesn’t understand english,” thought alice; “i daresay it’s
a french mouse, come over with william the conqueror.” (for, with all
her knowledge of history, alice had no very clear notion how long ago
anything had happened.) so she began again: “où est ma chatte?” which
was the first sentence in her french lesson-book. the mouse gave a
sudden leap out of the water, and seemed to quiver all over with
fright. “oh, i beg your pardon!” cried alice hastily, afraid that she
had hurt the poor animal’s feelings. “i quite forgot you didn’t like
cats.”

“not like cats!” cried the mouse, in a shrill, passionate voice. “would
_you_ like cats if you were me?”

“well, perhaps not,” said alice in a soothing tone: “don’t be angry
about it. and yet i wish i could show you our cat dinah: i think you’d
take a fancy to cats if you could only see her. she is such a dear
quiet thing,” alice went on, half to herself, as she swam lazily about
in the pool, “and she sits purring so nicely by the fire, licking her
paws and washing her face—and she is such a nice soft thing to
nurse—and she’s such a capital one for catching mice—oh, i beg your
pardon!” cried alice again, for this time the mouse was bristling all
over, and she felt certain it must be really offended. “we won’t talk
about her any more if you’d rather not.”

“we indeed!” cried the mouse, who was trembling down to the end of his
tail. “as if _i_ would talk on such a subject! our family always
_hated_ cats: nasty, low, vulgar things! don’t let me hear the name
again!”

“i won’t indeed!” said alice, in a great hurry to change the subject of
conversation. “are you—are you fond—of—of dogs?” the mouse did not
answer, so alice went on eagerly: “there is such a nice little dog near
our house i should like to show you! a little bright-eyed terrier, you
know, with oh, such long curly brown hair! and it’ll fetch things when
you throw them, and it’ll sit up and beg for its dinner, and all sorts
of things—i can’t remember half of them—and it belongs to a farmer, you
know, and he says it’s so useful, it’s worth a hundred pounds! he says
it kills all the rats and—oh dear!” cried alice in a sorrowful tone,
“i’m afraid i’ve offended it again!” for the mouse was swimming away
from her as hard as it could go, and making quite a commotion in the
pool as it went.

so she called softly after it, “mouse dear! do come back again, and we
won’t talk about cats or dogs either, if you don’t like them!” when the
mouse heard this, it turned round and swam slowly back to her: its face
was quite pale (with passion, alice thought), and it said in a low
trembling voice, “let us get to the shore, and then i’ll tell you my
history, and you’ll understand why it is i hate cats and dogs.”

it was high time to go, for the pool was getting quite crowded with the
birds and animals that had fallen into it: there were a duck and a
dodo, a lory and an eaglet, and several other curious creatures. alice
led the way, and the whole party swam to the shore.




chapter iii.
a caucus-race and a long tale


they were indeed a queer-looking party that assembled on the bank—the
birds with draggled feathers, the animals with their fur clinging close
to them, and all dripping wet, cross, and uncomfortable.

the first question of course was, how to get dry again: they had a
consultation about this, and after a few minutes it seemed quite
natural to alice to find herself talking familiarly with them, as if
she had known them all her life. indeed, she had quite a long argument
with the lory, who at last turned sulky, and would only say, “i am
older than you, and must know better;” and this alice would not allow
without knowing how old it was, and, as the lory positively refused to
tell its age, there was no more to be said.

at last the mouse, who seemed to be a person of authority among them,
called out, “sit down, all of you, and listen to me! _i’ll_ soon make
you dry enough!” they all sat down at once, in a large ring, with the
mouse in the middle. alice kept her eyes anxiously fixed on it, for she
felt sure she would catch a bad cold if she did not get dry very soon.

“ahem!” said the mouse with an important air, “are you all ready? this
is the driest thing i know. silence all round, if you please! ‘william
the conqueror, whose cause was favoured by the pope, was soon submitted
to by the english, who wanted leaders, and had been of late much
accustomed to usurpation and conquest. edwin and morcar, the earls of
mercia and northumbria—’”

“ugh!” said the lory, with a shiver.

“i beg your pardon!” said the mouse, frowning, but very politely: “did
you speak?”

“not i!” said the lory hastily.

“i thought you did,” said the mouse. “—i proceed. ‘edwin and morcar,
the earls of mercia and northumbria, declared for him: and even
stigand, the patriotic archbishop of canterbury, found it advisable—’”

“found _what_?” said the duck.

“found _it_,” the mouse replied rather crossly: “of course you know
what ‘it’ means.”

“i know what ‘it’ means well enough, when _i_ find a thing,” said the
duck: “it’s generally a frog or a worm. the question is, what did the
archbishop find?”

the mouse did not notice this question, but hurriedly went on, “‘—found
it advisable to go with edgar atheling to meet william and offer him
the crown. william’s conduct at first was moderate. but the insolence
of his normans—’ how are you getting on now, my dear?” it continued,
turning to alice as it spoke.

“as wet as ever,” said alice in a melancholy tone: “it doesn’t seem to
dry me at all.”

“in that case,” said the dodo solemnly, rising to its feet, “i move
that the meeting adjourn, for the immediate adoption of more energetic
remedies—”

“speak english!” said the eaglet. “i don’t know the meaning of half
those long words, and, what’s more, i don’t believe you do either!” and
the eaglet bent down its head to hide a smile: some of the other birds
tittered audibly.

“what i was going to say,” said the dodo in an offended tone, “was,
that the best thing to get us dry would be a caucus-race.”

“what _is_ a caucus-race?” said alice; not that she wanted much to
know, but the dodo had paused as if it thought that _somebody_ ought to
speak, and no one else seemed inclined to say anything.

“why,” said the dodo, “the best way to explain it is to do it.” (and,
as you might like to try the thing yourself, some winter day, i will
tell you how the dodo managed it.)

first it marked out a race-course, in a sort of circle, (“the exact
shape doesn’t matter,” it said,) and then all the party were placed
along the course, here and there. there was no “one, two, three, and
away,” but they began running when they liked, and left off when they
liked, so that it was not easy to know when the race was over. however,
when they had been running half an hour or so, and were quite dry
again, the dodo suddenly called out “the race is over!” and they all
crowded round it, panting, and asking, “but who has won?”

this question the dodo could not answer without a great deal of
thought, and it sat for a long time with one finger pressed upon its
forehead (the position in which you usually see shakespeare, in the
pictures of him), while the rest waited in silence. at last the dodo
said, “_everybody_ has won, and all must have prizes.”

“but who is to give the prizes?” quite a chorus of voices asked.

“why, _she_, of course,” said the dodo, pointing to alice with one
finger; and the whole party at once crowded round her, calling out in a
confused way, “prizes! prizes!”

alice had no idea what to do, and in despair she put her hand in her
pocket, and pulled out a box of comfits, (luckily the salt water had
not got into it), and handed them round as prizes. there was exactly
one a-piece, all round.

“but she must have a prize herself, you know,” said the mouse.

“of course,” the dodo replied very gravely. “what else have you got in
your pocket?” he went on, turning to alice.

“only a thimble,” said alice sadly.

“hand it over here,” said the dodo.

then they all crowded round her once more, while the dodo solemnly
presented the thimble, saying “we beg your acceptance of this elegant
thimble;” and, when it had finished this short speech, they all
cheered.

alice thought the whole thing very absurd, but they all looked so grave
that she did not dare to laugh; and, as she could not think of anything
to say, she simply bowed, and took the thimble, looking as solemn as
she could.

the next thing was to eat the comfits: this caused some noise and
confusion, as the large birds complained that they could not taste
theirs, and the small ones choked and had to be patted on the back.
however, it was over at last, and they sat down again in a ring, and
begged the mouse to tell them something more.

“you promised to tell me your history, you know,” said alice, “and why
it is you hate—c and d,” she added in a whisper, half afraid that it
would be offended again.

“mine is a long and a sad tale!” said the mouse, turning to alice, and
sighing.

“it _is_ a long tail, certainly,” said alice, looking down with wonder
at the mouse’s tail; “but why do you call it sad?” and she kept on
puzzling about it while the mouse was speaking, so that her idea of the
tale was something like this:—

         “fury said to a mouse, that he met in the house, ‘let us both
         go to law: _i_ will prosecute _you_.—come, i’ll take no
         denial; we must have a trial: for really this morning i’ve
         nothing to do.’ said the mouse to the cur, ‘such a trial, dear
         sir, with no jury or judge, would be wasting our breath.’
         ‘i’ll be judge, i’ll be jury,’ said cunning old fury: ‘i’ll
         try the whole cause, and condemn you to death.’”

“you are not attending!” said the mouse to alice severely. “what are
you thinking of?”

“i beg your pardon,” said alice very humbly: “you had got to the fifth
bend, i think?”

“i had _not!_” cried the mouse, sharply and very angrily.

“a knot!” said alice, always ready to make herself useful, and looking
anxiously about her. “oh, do let me help to undo it!”

“i shall do nothing of the sort,” said the mouse, getting up and
walking away. “you insult me by talking such nonsense!”

“i didn’t mean it!” pleaded poor alice. “but you’re so easily offended,
you know!”

the mouse only growled in reply.

“please come back and finish your story!” alice called after it; and
the others all joined in chorus, “yes, please do!” but the mouse only
shook its head impatiently, and walked a little quicker.

“what a pity it wouldn’t stay!” sighed the lory, as soon as it was
quite out of sight; and an old crab took the opportunity of saying to
her daughter “ah, my dear! let this be a lesson to you never to lose
_your_ temper!” “hold your tongue, ma!” said the young crab, a little
snappishly. “you’re enough to try the patience of an oyster!”

“i wish i had our dinah here, i know i do!” said alice aloud,
addressing nobody in particular. “she’d soon fetch it back!”

“and who is dinah, if i might venture to ask the question?” said the
lory.

alice replied eagerly, for she was always ready to talk about her pet:
“dinah’s our cat. and she’s such a capital one for catching mice you
can’t think! and oh, i wish you could see her after the birds! why,
she’ll eat a little bird as soon as look at it!”

this speech caused a remarkable sensation among the party. some of the
birds hurried off at once: one old magpie began wrapping itself up very
carefully, remarking, “i really must be getting home; the night-air
doesn’t suit my throat!” and a canary called out in a trembling voice
to its children, “come away, my dears! it’s high time you were all in
bed!” on various pretexts they all moved off, and alice was soon left
alone.

“i wish i hadn’t mentioned dinah!” she said to herself in a melancholy
tone. “nobody seems to like her, down here, and i’m sure she’s the best
cat in the world! oh, my dear dinah! i wonder if i shall ever see you
any more!” and here poor alice began to cry again, for she felt very
lonely and low-spirited. in a little while, however, she again heard a
little pattering of footsteps in the distance, and she looked up
eagerly, half hoping that the mouse had changed his mind, and was
coming back to finish his story.




chapter iv.
the rabbit sends in a little bill


it was the white rabbit, trotting slowly back again, and looking
anxiously about as it went, as if it had lost something; and she heard
it muttering to itself “the duchess! the duchess! oh my dear paws! oh
my fur and whiskers! she’ll get me executed, as sure as ferrets are
ferrets! where _can_ i have dropped them, i wonder?” alice guessed in a
moment that it was looking for the fan and the pair of white kid
gloves, and she very good-naturedly began hunting about for them, but
they were nowhere to be seen—everything seemed to have changed since
her swim in the pool, and the great hall, with the glass table and the
little door, had vanished completely.

very soon the rabbit noticed alice, as she went hunting about, and
called out to her in an angry tone, “why, mary ann, what _are_ you
doing out here? run home this moment, and fetch me a pair of gloves and
a fan! quick, now!” and alice was so much frightened that she ran off
at once in the direction it pointed to, without trying to explain the
mistake it had made.

“he took me for his housemaid,” she said to herself as she ran. “how
surprised he’ll be when he finds out who i am! but i’d better take him
his fan and gloves—that is, if i can find them.” as she said this, she
came upon a neat little house, on the door of which was a bright brass
plate with the name “w. rabbit,” engraved upon it. she went in without
knocking, and hurried upstairs, in great fear lest she should meet the
real mary ann, and be turned out of the house before she had found the
fan and gloves.

“how queer it seems,” alice said to herself, “to be going messages for
a rabbit! i suppose dinah’ll be sending me on messages next!” and she
began fancying the sort of thing that would happen: “‘miss alice! come
here directly, and get ready for your walk!’ ‘coming in a minute,
nurse! but i’ve got to see that the mouse doesn’t get out.’ only i
don’t think,” alice went on, “that they’d let dinah stop in the house
if it began ordering people about like that!”

by this time she had found her way into a tidy little room with a table
in the window, and on it (as she had hoped) a fan and two or three
pairs of tiny white kid gloves: she took up the fan and a pair of the
gloves, and was just going to leave the room, when her eye fell upon a
little bottle that stood near the looking-glass. there was no label
this time with the words “drink me,” but nevertheless she uncorked it
and put it to her lips. “i know _something_ interesting is sure to
happen,” she said to herself, “whenever i eat or drink anything; so
i’ll just see what this bottle does. i do hope it’ll make me grow large
again, for really i’m quite tired of being such a tiny little thing!”

it did so indeed, and much sooner than she had expected: before she had
drunk half the bottle, she found her head pressing against the ceiling,
and had to stoop to save her neck from being broken. she hastily put
down the bottle, saying to herself “that’s quite enough—i hope i shan’t
grow any more—as it is, i can’t get out at the door—i do wish i hadn’t
drunk quite so much!”

alas! it was too late to wish that! she went on growing, and growing,
and very soon had to kneel down on the floor: in another minute there
was not even room for this, and she tried the effect of lying down with
one elbow against the door, and the other arm curled round her head.
still she went on growing, and, as a last resource, she put one arm out
of the window, and one foot up the chimney, and said to herself “now i
can do no more, whatever happens. what _will_ become of me?”

luckily for alice, the little magic bottle had now had its full effect,
and she grew no larger: still it was very uncomfortable, and, as there
seemed to be no sort of chance of her ever getting out of the room
again, no wonder she felt unhappy.

“it was much pleasanter at home,” thought poor alice, “when one wasn’t
always growing larger and smaller, and being ordered about by mice and
rabbits. i almost wish i hadn’t gone down that rabbit-hole—and yet—and
yet—it’s rather curious, you know, this sort of life! i do wonder what
_can_ have happened to me! when i used to read fairy-tales, i fancied
that kind of thing never happened, and now here i am in the middle of
one! there ought to be a book written about me, that there ought! and
when i grow up, i’ll write one—but i’m grown up now,” she added in a
sorrowful tone; “at least there’s no room to grow up any more _here_.”

“but then,” thought alice, “shall i _never_ get any older than i am
now? that’ll be a comfort, one way—never to be an old woman—but
then—always to have lessons to learn! oh, i shouldn’t like _that!_”

“oh, you foolish alice!” she answered herself. “how can you learn
lessons in here? why, there’s hardly room for _you_, and no room at all
for any lesson-books!”

and so she went on, taking first one side and then the other, and
making quite a conversation of it altogether; but after a few minutes
she heard a voice outside, and stopped to listen.

“mary ann! mary ann!” said the voice. “fetch me my gloves this moment!”
then came a little pattering of feet on the stairs. alice knew it was
the rabbit coming to look for her, and she trembled till she shook the
house, quite forgetting that she was now about a thousand times as
large as the rabbit, and had no reason to be afraid of it.

presently the rabbit came up to the door, and tried to open it; but, as
the door opened inwards, and alice’s elbow was pressed hard against it,
that attempt proved a failure. alice heard it say to itself “then i’ll
go round and get in at the window.”

“_that_ you won’t!” thought alice, and, after waiting till she fancied
she heard the rabbit just under the window, she suddenly spread out her
hand, and made a snatch in the air. she did not get hold of anything,
but she heard a little shriek and a fall, and a crash of broken glass,
from which she concluded that it was just possible it had fallen into a
cucumber-frame, or something of the sort.

next came an angry voice—the rabbit’s—“pat! pat! where are you?” and
then a voice she had never heard before, “sure then i’m here! digging
for apples, yer honour!”

“digging for apples, indeed!” said the rabbit angrily. “here! come and
help me out of _this!_” (sounds of more broken glass.)

“now tell me, pat, what’s that in the window?”

“sure, it’s an arm, yer honour!” (he pronounced it “arrum.”)

“an arm, you goose! who ever saw one that size? why, it fills the whole
window!”

“sure, it does, yer honour: but it’s an arm for all that.”

“well, it’s got no business there, at any rate: go and take it away!”

there was a long silence after this, and alice could only hear whispers
now and then; such as, “sure, i don’t like it, yer honour, at all, at
all!” “do as i tell you, you coward!” and at last she spread out her
hand again, and made another snatch in the air. this time there were
_two_ little shrieks, and more sounds of broken glass. “what a number
of cucumber-frames there must be!” thought alice. “i wonder what
they’ll do next! as for pulling me out of the window, i only wish they
_could!_ i’m sure _i_ don’t want to stay in here any longer!”

she waited for some time without hearing anything more: at last came a
rumbling of little cartwheels, and the sound of a good many voices all
talking together: she made out the words: “where’s the other
ladder?—why, i hadn’t to bring but one; bill’s got the other—bill!
fetch it here, lad!—here, put ’em up at this corner—no, tie ’em
together first—they don’t reach half high enough yet—oh! they’ll do
well enough; don’t be particular—here, bill! catch hold of this
rope—will the roof bear?—mind that loose slate—oh, it’s coming down!
heads below!” (a loud crash)—“now, who did that?—it was bill, i
fancy—who’s to go down the chimney?—nay, _i_ shan’t! _you_ do
it!—_that_ i won’t, then!—bill’s to go down—here, bill! the master says
you’re to go down the chimney!”

“oh! so bill’s got to come down the chimney, has he?” said alice to
herself. “shy, they seem to put everything upon bill! i wouldn’t be in
bill’s place for a good deal: this fireplace is narrow, to be sure; but
i _think_ i can kick a little!”

she drew her foot as far down the chimney as she could, and waited till
she heard a little animal (she couldn’t guess of what sort it was)
scratching and scrambling about in the chimney close above her: then,
saying to herself “this is bill,” she gave one sharp kick, and waited
to see what would happen next.

the first thing she heard was a general chorus of “there goes bill!”
then the rabbit’s voice along—“catch him, you by the hedge!” then
silence, and then another confusion of voices—“hold up his head—brandy
now—don’t choke him—how was it, old fellow? what happened to you? tell
us all about it!”

last came a little feeble, squeaking voice, (“that’s bill,” thought
alice,) “well, i hardly know—no more, thank ye; i’m better now—but i’m
a deal too flustered to tell you—all i know is, something comes at me
like a jack-in-the-box, and up i goes like a sky-rocket!”

“so you did, old fellow!” said the others.

“we must burn the house down!” said the rabbit’s voice; and alice
called out as loud as she could, “if you do, i’ll set dinah at you!”

there was a dead silence instantly, and alice thought to herself, “i
wonder what they _will_ do next! if they had any sense, they’d take the
roof off.” after a minute or two, they began moving about again, and
alice heard the rabbit say, “a barrowful will do, to begin with.”

“a barrowful of _what?_” thought alice; but she had not long to doubt,
for the next moment a shower of little pebbles came rattling in at the
window, and some of them hit her in the face. “i’ll put a stop to
this,” she said to herself, and shouted out, “you’d better not do that
again!” which produced another dead silence.

alice noticed with some surprise that the pebbles were all turning into
little cakes as they lay on the floor, and a bright idea came into her
head. “if i eat one of these cakes,” she thought, “it’s sure to make
_some_ change in my size; and as it can’t possibly make me larger, it
must make me smaller, i suppose.”

so she swallowed one of the cakes, and was delighted to find that she
began shrinking directly. as soon as she was small enough to get
through the door, she ran out of the house, and found quite a crowd of
little animals and birds waiting outside. the poor little lizard, bill,
was in the middle, being held up by two guinea-pigs, who were giving it
something out of a bottle. they all made a rush at alice the moment she
appeared; but she ran off as hard as she could, and soon found herself
safe in a thick wood.

“the first thing i’ve got to do,” said alice to herself, as she
wandered about in the wood, “is to grow to my right size again; and the
second thing is to find my way into that lovely garden. i think that
will be the best plan.”

it sounded an excellent plan, no doubt, and very neatly and simply
arranged; the only difficulty was, that she had not the smallest idea
how to set about it; and while she was peering about anxiously among
the trees, a little sharp bark just over her head made her look up in a
great hurry.

an enormous puppy was looking down at her with large round eyes, and
feebly stretching out one paw, trying to touch her. “poor little
thing!” said alice, in a coaxing tone, and she tried hard to whistle to
it; but she was terribly frightened all the time at the thought that it
might be hungry, in which case it would be very likely to eat her up in
spite of all her coaxing.

hardly knowing what she did, she picked up a little bit of stick, and
held it out to the puppy; whereupon the puppy jumped into the air off
all its feet at once, with a yelp of delight, and rushed at the stick,
and made believe to worry it; then alice dodged behind a great thistle,
to keep herself from being run over; and the moment she appeared on the
other side, the puppy made another rush at the stick, and tumbled head
over heels in its hurry to get hold of it; then alice, thinking it was
very like having a game of play with a cart-horse, and expecting every
moment to be trampled under its feet, ran round the thistle again; then
the puppy began a series of short charges at the stick, running a very
little way forwards each time and a long way back, and barking hoarsely
all the while, till at last it sat down a good way off, panting, with
its tongue hanging out of its mouth, and its great eyes half shut.

this seemed to alice a good opportunity for making her escape; so she
set off at once, and ran till she was quite tired and out of breath,
and till the puppy’s bark sounded quite faint in the distance.

“and yet what a dear little puppy it was!” said alice, as she leant
against a buttercup to rest herself, and fanned herself with one of the
leaves: “i should have liked teaching it tricks very much, if—if i’d
only been the right size to do it! oh dear! i’d nearly forgotten that
i’ve got to grow up again! let me see—how _is_ it to be managed? i
suppose i ought to eat or drink something or other; but the great
question is, what?”

the great question certainly was, what? alice looked all round her at
the flowers and the blades of grass, but she did not see anything that
looked like the right thing to eat or drink under the circumstances.
there was a large mushroom growing near her, about the same height as
herself; and when she had looked under it, and on both sides of it, and
behind it, it occurred to her that she might as well look and see what
was on the top of it.

she stretched herself up on tiptoe, and peeped over the edge of the
mushroom, and her eyes immediately met those of a large blue
caterpillar, that was sitting on the top with its arms folded, quietly
smoking a long hookah, and taking not the smallest notice of her or of
anything else.




chapter v.
advice from a caterpillar


the caterpillar and alice looked at each other for some time in
silence: at last the caterpillar took the hookah out of its mouth, and
addressed her in a languid, sleepy voice.

“who are _you?_” said the caterpillar.

this was not an encouraging opening for a conversation. alice replied,
rather shyly, “i—i hardly know, sir, just at present—at least i know
who i _was_ when i got up this morning, but i think i must have been
changed several times since then.”

“what do you mean by that?” said the caterpillar sternly. “explain
yourself!”

“i can’t explain _myself_, i’m afraid, sir,” said alice, “because i’m
not myself, you see.”

“i don’t see,” said the caterpillar.

“i’m afraid i can’t put it more clearly,” alice replied very politely,
“for i can’t understand it myself to begin with; and being so many
different sizes in a day is very confusing.”

“it isn’t,” said the caterpillar.

“well, perhaps you haven’t found it so yet,” said alice; “but when you
have to turn into a chrysalis—you will some day, you know—and then
after that into a butterfly, i should think you’ll feel it a little
queer, won’t you?”

“not a bit,” said the caterpillar.

“well, perhaps your feelings may be different,” said alice; “all i know
is, it would feel very queer to _me_.”

“you!” said the caterpillar contemptuously. “who are _you?_”

which brought them back again to the beginning of the conversation.
alice felt a little irritated at the caterpillar’s making such _very_
short remarks, and she drew herself up and said, very gravely, “i
think, you ought to tell me who _you_ are, first.”

“why?” said the caterpillar.

here was another puzzling question; and as alice could not think of any
good reason, and as the caterpillar seemed to be in a _very_ unpleasant
state of mind, she turned away.

“come back!” the caterpillar called after her. “i’ve something
important to say!”

this sounded promising, certainly: alice turned and came back again.

“keep your temper,” said the caterpillar.

“is that all?” said alice, swallowing down her anger as well as she
could.

“no,” said the caterpillar.

alice thought she might as well wait, as she had nothing else to do,
and perhaps after all it might tell her something worth hearing. for
some minutes it puffed away without speaking, but at last it unfolded
its arms, took the hookah out of its mouth again, and said, “so you
think you’re changed, do you?”

“i’m afraid i am, sir,” said alice; “i can’t remember things as i
used—and i don’t keep the same size for ten minutes together!”

“can’t remember _what_ things?” said the caterpillar.

“well, i’ve tried to say “how doth the little busy bee,” but it all
came different!” alice replied in a very melancholy voice.

“repeat, “_you are old, father william_,’” said the caterpillar.

alice folded her hands, and began:—

“you are old, father william,” the young man said,
    “and your hair has become very white;
and yet you incessantly stand on your head—
    do you think, at your age, it is right?”

“in my youth,” father william replied to his son,
    “i feared it might injure the brain;
but, now that i’m perfectly sure i have none,
    why, i do it again and again.”

“you are old,” said the youth, “as i mentioned before,
    and have grown most uncommonly fat;
yet you turned a back-somersault in at the door—
    pray, what is the reason of that?”

“in my youth,” said the sage, as he shook his grey locks,
    “i kept all my limbs very supple
by the use of this ointment—one shilling the box—
    allow me to sell you a couple?”

“you are old,” said the youth, “and your jaws are too weak
    for anything tougher than suet;
yet you finished the goose, with the bones and the beak—
    pray, how did you manage to do it?”

“in my youth,” said his father, “i took to the law,
    and argued each case with my wife;
and the muscular strength, which it gave to my jaw,
    has lasted the rest of my life.”

“you are old,” said the youth, “one would hardly suppose
    that your eye was as steady as ever;
yet you balanced an eel on the end of your nose—
    what made you so awfully clever?”

“i have answered three questions, and that is enough,”
    said his father; “don’t give yourself airs!
do you think i can listen all day to such stuff?
    be off, or i’ll kick you down stairs!”


“that is not said right,” said the caterpillar.

“not _quite_ right, i’m afraid,” said alice, timidly; “some of the
words have got altered.”

“it is wrong from beginning to end,” said the caterpillar decidedly,
and there was silence for some minutes.

the caterpillar was the first to speak.

“what size do you want to be?” it asked.

“oh, i’m not particular as to size,” alice hastily replied; “only one
doesn’t like changing so often, you know.”

“i _don’t_ know,” said the caterpillar.

alice said nothing: she had never been so much contradicted in her life
before, and she felt that she was losing her temper.

“are you content now?” said the caterpillar.

“well, i should like to be a _little_ larger, sir, if you wouldn’t
mind,” said alice: “three inches is such a wretched height to be.”

“it is a very good height indeed!” said the caterpillar angrily,
rearing itself upright as it spoke (it was exactly three inches high).

“but i’m not used to it!” pleaded poor alice in a piteous tone. and she
thought of herself, “i wish the creatures wouldn’t be so easily
offended!”

“you’ll get used to it in time,” said the caterpillar; and it put the
hookah into its mouth and began smoking again.

this time alice waited patiently until it chose to speak again. in a
minute or two the caterpillar took the hookah out of its mouth and
yawned once or twice, and shook itself. then it got down off the
mushroom, and crawled away in the grass, merely remarking as it went,
“one side will make you grow taller, and the other side will make you
grow shorter.”

“one side of _what?_ the other side of _what?_” thought alice to
herself.

“of the mushroom,” said the caterpillar, just as if she had asked it
aloud; and in another moment it was out of sight.

alice remained looking thoughtfully at the mushroom for a minute,
trying to make out which were the two sides of it; and as it was
perfectly round, she found this a very difficult question. however, at
last she stretched her arms round it as far as they would go, and broke
off a bit of the edge with each hand.

“and now which is which?” she said to herself, and nibbled a little of
the right-hand bit to try the effect: the next moment she felt a
violent blow underneath her chin: it had struck her foot!

she was a good deal frightened by this very sudden change, but she felt
that there was no time to be lost, as she was shrinking rapidly; so she
set to work at once to eat some of the other bit. her chin was pressed
so closely against her foot, that there was hardly room to open her
mouth; but she did it at last, and managed to swallow a morsel of the
lefthand bit.

*      *      *      *      *      *      *

    *      *      *      *      *      *

*      *      *      *      *      *      *


“come, my head’s free at last!” said alice in a tone of delight, which
changed into alarm in another moment, when she found that her shoulders
were nowhere to be found: all she could see, when she looked down, was
an immense length of neck, which seemed to rise like a stalk out of a
sea of green leaves that lay far below her.

“what _can_ all that green stuff be?” said alice. “and where _have_ my
shoulders got to? and oh, my poor hands, how is it i can’t see you?”
she was moving them about as she spoke, but no result seemed to follow,
except a little shaking among the distant green leaves.

as there seemed to be no chance of getting her hands up to her head,
she tried to get her head down to them, and was delighted to find that
her neck would bend about easily in any direction, like a serpent. she
had just succeeded in curving it down into a graceful zigzag, and was
going to dive in among the leaves, which she found to be nothing but
the tops of the trees under which she had been wandering, when a sharp
hiss made her draw back in a hurry: a large pigeon had flown into her
face, and was beating her violently with its wings.

“serpent!” screamed the pigeon.

“i’m _not_ a serpent!” said alice indignantly. “let me alone!”

“serpent, i say again!” repeated the pigeon, but in a more subdued
tone, and added with a kind of sob, “i’ve tried every way, and nothing
seems to suit them!”

“i haven’t the least idea what you’re talking about,” said alice.

“i’ve tried the roots of trees, and i’ve tried banks, and i’ve tried
hedges,” the pigeon went on, without attending to her; “but those
serpents! there’s no pleasing them!”

alice was more and more puzzled, but she thought there was no use in
saying anything more till the pigeon had finished.

“as if it wasn’t trouble enough hatching the eggs,” said the pigeon;
“but i must be on the look-out for serpents night and day! why, i
haven’t had a wink of sleep these three weeks!”

“i’m very sorry you’ve been annoyed,” said alice, who was beginning to
see its meaning.

“and just as i’d taken the highest tree in the wood,” continued the
pigeon, raising its voice to a shriek, “and just as i was thinking i
should be free of them at last, they must needs come wriggling down
from the sky! ugh, serpent!”

“but i’m _not_ a serpent, i tell you!” said alice. “i’m a—i’m a—”

“well! _what_ are you?” said the pigeon. “i can see you’re trying to
invent something!”

“i—i’m a little girl,” said alice, rather doubtfully, as she remembered
the number of changes she had gone through that day.

“a likely story indeed!” said the pigeon in a tone of the deepest
contempt. “i’ve seen a good many little girls in my time, but never
_one_ with such a neck as that! no, no! you’re a serpent; and there’s
no use denying it. i suppose you’ll be telling me next that you never
tasted an egg!”

“i _have_ tasted eggs, certainly,” said alice, who was a very truthful
child; “but little girls eat eggs quite as much as serpents do, you
know.”

“i don’t believe it,” said the pigeon; “but if they do, why then
they’re a kind of serpent, that’s all i can say.”

this was such a new idea to alice, that she was quite silent for a
minute or two, which gave the pigeon the opportunity of adding, “you’re
looking for eggs, i know _that_ well enough; and what does it matter to
me whether you’re a little girl or a serpent?”

“it matters a good deal to _me_,” said alice hastily; “but i’m not
looking for eggs, as it happens; and if i was, i shouldn’t want
_yours_: i don’t like them raw.”

“well, be off, then!” said the pigeon in a sulky tone, as it settled
down again into its nest. alice crouched down among the trees as well
as she could, for her neck kept getting entangled among the branches,
and every now and then she had to stop and untwist it. after a while
she remembered that she still held the pieces of mushroom in her hands,
and she set to work very carefully, nibbling first at one and then at
the other, and growing sometimes taller and sometimes shorter, until
she had succeeded in bringing herself down to her usual height.

it was so long since she had been anything near the right size, that it
felt quite strange at first; but she got used to it in a few minutes,
and began talking to herself, as usual. “come, there’s half my plan
done now! how puzzling all these changes are! i’m never sure what i’m
going to be, from one minute to another! however, i’ve got back to my
right size: the next thing is, to get into that beautiful garden—how
_is_ that to be done, i wonder?” as she said this, she came suddenly
upon an open place, with a little house in it about four feet high.
“whoever lives there,” thought alice, “it’ll never do to come upon them
_this_ size: why, i should frighten them out of their wits!” so she
began nibbling at the righthand bit again, and did not venture to go
near the house till she had brought herself down to nine inches high.




chapter vi.
pig and pepper


for a minute or two she stood looking at the house, and wondering what
to do next, when suddenly a footman in livery came running out of the
wood—(she considered him to be a footman because he was in livery:
otherwise, judging by his face only, she would have called him a
fish)—and rapped loudly at the door with his knuckles. it was opened by
another footman in livery, with a round face, and large eyes like a
frog; and both footmen, alice noticed, had powdered hair that curled
all over their heads. she felt very curious to know what it was all
about, and crept a little way out of the wood to listen.

the fish-footman began by producing from under his arm a great letter,
nearly as large as himself, and this he handed over to the other,
saying, in a solemn tone, “for the duchess. an invitation from the
queen to play croquet.” the frog-footman repeated, in the same solemn
tone, only changing the order of the words a little, “from the queen.
an invitation for the duchess to play croquet.”

then they both bowed low, and their curls got entangled together.

alice laughed so much at this, that she had to run back into the wood
for fear of their hearing her; and when she next peeped out the
fish-footman was gone, and the other was sitting on the ground near the
door, staring stupidly up into the sky.

alice went timidly up to the door, and knocked.

“there’s no sort of use in knocking,” said the footman, “and that for
two reasons. first, because i’m on the same side of the door as you
are; secondly, because they’re making such a noise inside, no one could
possibly hear you.” and certainly there _was_ a most extraordinary
noise going on within—a constant howling and sneezing, and every now
and then a great crash, as if a dish or kettle had been broken to
pieces.

“please, then,” said alice, “how am i to get in?”

“there might be some sense in your knocking,” the footman went on
without attending to her, “if we had the door between us. for instance,
if you were _inside_, you might knock, and i could let you out, you
know.” he was looking up into the sky all the time he was speaking, and
this alice thought decidedly uncivil. “but perhaps he can’t help it,”
she said to herself; “his eyes are so _very_ nearly at the top of his
head. but at any rate he might answer questions.—how am i to get in?”
she repeated, aloud.

“i shall sit here,” the footman remarked, “till tomorrow—”

at this moment the door of the house opened, and a large plate came
skimming out, straight at the footman’s head: it just grazed his nose,
and broke to pieces against one of the trees behind him.

“—or next day, maybe,” the footman continued in the same tone, exactly
as if nothing had happened.

“how am i to get in?” asked alice again, in a louder tone.

“_are_ you to get in at all?” said the footman. “that’s the first
question, you know.”

it was, no doubt: only alice did not like to be told so. “it’s really
dreadful,” she muttered to herself, “the way all the creatures argue.
it’s enough to drive one crazy!”

the footman seemed to think this a good opportunity for repeating his
remark, with variations. “i shall sit here,” he said, “on and off, for
days and days.”

“but what am _i_ to do?” said alice.

“anything you like,” said the footman, and began whistling.

“oh, there’s no use in talking to him,” said alice desperately: “he’s
perfectly idiotic!” and she opened the door and went in.

the door led right into a large kitchen, which was full of smoke from
one end to the other: the duchess was sitting on a three-legged stool
in the middle, nursing a baby; the cook was leaning over the fire,
stirring a large cauldron which seemed to be full of soup.

“there’s certainly too much pepper in that soup!” alice said to
herself, as well as she could for sneezing.

there was certainly too much of it in the air. even the duchess sneezed
occasionally; and as for the baby, it was sneezing and howling
alternately without a moment’s pause. the only things in the kitchen
that did not sneeze, were the cook, and a large cat which was sitting
on the hearth and grinning from ear to ear.

“please would you tell me,” said alice, a little timidly, for she was
not quite sure whether it was good manners for her to speak first, “why
your cat grins like that?”

“it’s a cheshire cat,” said the duchess, “and that’s why. pig!”

she said the last word with such sudden violence that alice quite
jumped; but she saw in another moment that it was addressed to the
baby, and not to her, so she took courage, and went on again:—

“i didn’t know that cheshire cats always grinned; in fact, i didn’t
know that cats _could_ grin.”

“they all can,” said the duchess; “and most of ’em do.”

“i don’t know of any that do,” alice said very politely, feeling quite
pleased to have got into a conversation.

“you don’t know much,” said the duchess; “and that’s a fact.”

alice did not at all like the tone of this remark, and thought it would
be as well to introduce some other subject of conversation. while she
was trying to fix on one, the cook took the cauldron of soup off the
fire, and at once set to work throwing everything within her reach at
the duchess and the baby—the fire-irons came first; then followed a
shower of saucepans, plates, and dishes. the duchess took no notice of
them even when they hit her; and the baby was howling so much already,
that it was quite impossible to say whether the blows hurt it or not.

“oh, _please_ mind what you’re doing!” cried alice, jumping up and down
in an agony of terror. “oh, there goes his _precious_ nose!” as an
unusually large saucepan flew close by it, and very nearly carried it
off.

“if everybody minded their own business,” the duchess said in a hoarse
growl, “the world would go round a deal faster than it does.”

“which would _not_ be an advantage,” said alice, who felt very glad to
get an opportunity of showing off a little of her knowledge. “just
think of what work it would make with the day and night! you see the
earth takes twenty-four hours to turn round on its axis—”

“talking of axes,” said the duchess, “chop off her head!”

alice glanced rather anxiously at the cook, to see if she meant to take
the hint; but the cook was busily stirring the soup, and seemed not to
be listening, so she went on again: “twenty-four hours, i _think_; or
is it twelve? i—”

“oh, don’t bother _me_,” said the duchess; “i never could abide
figures!” and with that she began nursing her child again, singing a
sort of lullaby to it as she did so, and giving it a violent shake at
the end of every line:

“speak roughly to your little boy,
    and beat him when he sneezes:
he only does it to annoy,
    because he knows it teases.”


chorus.
(in which the cook and the baby joined):


“wow! wow! wow!”


while the duchess sang the second verse of the song, she kept tossing
the baby violently up and down, and the poor little thing howled so,
that alice could hardly hear the words:—

“i speak severely to my boy,
    i beat him when he sneezes;
for he can thoroughly enjoy
    the pepper when he pleases!”


chorus.


“wow! wow! wow!”


“here! you may nurse it a bit, if you like!” the duchess said to alice,
flinging the baby at her as she spoke. “i must go and get ready to play
croquet with the queen,” and she hurried out of the room. the cook
threw a frying-pan after her as she went out, but it just missed her.

alice caught the baby with some difficulty, as it was a queer-shaped
little creature, and held out its arms and legs in all directions,
“just like a star-fish,” thought alice. the poor little thing was
snorting like a steam-engine when she caught it, and kept doubling
itself up and straightening itself out again, so that altogether, for
the first minute or two, it was as much as she could do to hold it.

as soon as she had made out the proper way of nursing it, (which was to
twist it up into a sort of knot, and then keep tight hold of its right
ear and left foot, so as to prevent its undoing itself,) she carried it
out into the open air. “if i don’t take this child away with me,”
thought alice, “they’re sure to kill it in a day or two: wouldn’t it be
murder to leave it behind?” she said the last words out loud, and the
little thing grunted in reply (it had left off sneezing by this time).
“don’t grunt,” said alice; “that’s not at all a proper way of
expressing yourself.”

the baby grunted again, and alice looked very anxiously into its face
to see what was the matter with it. there could be no doubt that it had
a _very_ turn-up nose, much more like a snout than a real nose; also
its eyes were getting extremely small for a baby: altogether alice did
not like the look of the thing at all. “but perhaps it was only
sobbing,” she thought, and looked into its eyes again, to see if there
were any tears.

no, there were no tears. “if you’re going to turn into a pig, my dear,”
said alice, seriously, “i’ll have nothing more to do with you. mind
now!” the poor little thing sobbed again (or grunted, it was impossible
to say which), and they went on for some while in silence.

alice was just beginning to think to herself, “now, what am i to do
with this creature when i get it home?” when it grunted again, so
violently, that she looked down into its face in some alarm. this time
there could be _no_ mistake about it: it was neither more nor less than
a pig, and she felt that it would be quite absurd for her to carry it
further.

so she set the little creature down, and felt quite relieved to see it
trot away quietly into the wood. “if it had grown up,” she said to
herself, “it would have made a dreadfully ugly child: but it makes
rather a handsome pig, i think.” and she began thinking over other
children she knew, who might do very well as pigs, and was just saying
to herself, “if one only knew the right way to change them—” when she
was a little startled by seeing the cheshire cat sitting on a bough of
a tree a few yards off.

the cat only grinned when it saw alice. it looked good-natured, she
thought: still it had _very_ long claws and a great many teeth, so she
felt that it ought to be treated with respect.

“cheshire puss,” she began, rather timidly, as she did not at all know
whether it would like the name: however, it only grinned a little
wider. “come, it’s pleased so far,” thought alice, and she went on.
“would you tell me, please, which way i ought to go from here?”

“that depends a good deal on where you want to get to,” said the cat.

“i don’t much care where—” said alice.

“then it doesn’t matter which way you go,” said the cat.

“—so long as i get _somewhere_,” alice added as an explanation.

“oh, you’re sure to do that,” said the cat, “if you only walk long
enough.”

alice felt that this could not be denied, so she tried another
question. “what sort of people live about here?”

“in _that_ direction,” the cat said, waving its right paw round, “lives
a hatter: and in _that_ direction,” waving the other paw, “lives a
march hare. visit either you like: they’re both mad.”

“but i don’t want to go among mad people,” alice remarked.

“oh, you can’t help that,” said the cat: “we’re all mad here. i’m mad.
you’re mad.”

“how do you know i’m mad?” said alice.

“you must be,” said the cat, “or you wouldn’t have come here.”

alice didn’t think that proved it at all; however, she went on “and how
do you know that you’re mad?”

“to begin with,” said the cat, “a dog’s not mad. you grant that?”

“i suppose so,” said alice.

“well, then,” the cat went on, “you see, a dog growls when it’s angry,
and wags its tail when it’s pleased. now _i_ growl when i’m pleased,
and wag my tail when i’m angry. therefore i’m mad.”

“_i_ call it purring, not growling,” said alice.

“call it what you like,” said the cat. “do you play croquet with the
queen to-day?”

“i should like it very much,” said alice, “but i haven’t been invited
yet.”

“you’ll see me there,” said the cat, and vanished.

alice was not much surprised at this, she was getting so used to queer
things happening. while she was looking at the place where it had been,
it suddenly appeared again.

“by-the-bye, what became of the baby?” said the cat. “i’d nearly
forgotten to ask.”

“it turned into a pig,” alice quietly said, just as if it had come back
in a natural way.

“i thought it would,” said the cat, and vanished again.

alice waited a little, half expecting to see it again, but it did not
appear, and after a minute or two she walked on in the direction in
which the march hare was said to live. “i’ve seen hatters before,” she
said to herself; “the march hare will be much the most interesting, and
perhaps as this is may it won’t be raving mad—at least not so mad as it
was in march.” as she said this, she looked up, and there was the cat
again, sitting on a branch of a tree.

“did you say pig, or fig?” said the cat.

“i said pig,” replied alice; “and i wish you wouldn’t keep appearing
and vanishing so suddenly: you make one quite giddy.”

“all right,” said the cat; and this time it vanished quite slowly,
beginning with the end of the tail, and ending with the grin, which
remained some time after the rest of it had gone.

“well! i’ve often seen a cat without a grin,” thought alice; “but a
grin without a cat! it’s the most curious thing i ever saw in my life!”

she had not gone much farther before she came in sight of the house of
the march hare: she thought it must be the right house, because the
chimneys were shaped like ears and the roof was thatched with fur. it
was so large a house, that she did not like to go nearer till she had
nibbled some more of the lefthand bit of mushroom, and raised herself
to about two feet high: even then she walked up towards it rather
timidly, saying to herself “suppose it should be raving mad after all!
i almost wish i’d gone to see the hatter instead!”




chapter vii.
a mad tea-party


there was a table set out under a tree in front of the house, and the
march hare and the hatter were having tea at it: a dormouse was sitting
between them, fast asleep, and the other two were using it as a
cushion, resting their elbows on it, and talking over its head. “very
uncomfortable for the dormouse,” thought alice; “only, as it’s asleep,
i suppose it doesn’t mind.”

the table was a large one, but the three were all crowded together at
one corner of it: “no room! no room!” they cried out when they saw
alice coming. “there’s _plenty_ of room!” said alice indignantly, and
she sat down in a large arm-chair at one end of the table.

“have some wine,” the march hare said in an encouraging tone.

alice looked all round the table, but there was nothing on it but tea.
“i don’t see any wine,” she remarked.

“there isn’t any,” said the march hare.

“then it wasn’t very civil of you to offer it,” said alice angrily.

“it wasn’t very civil of you to sit down without being invited,” said
the march hare.

“i didn’t know it was _your_ table,” said alice; “it’s laid for a great
many more than three.”

“your hair wants cutting,” said the hatter. he had been looking at
alice for some time with great curiosity, and this was his first
speech.

“you should learn not to make personal remarks,” alice said with some
severity; “it’s very rude.”

the hatter opened his eyes very wide on hearing this; but all he _said_
was, “why is a raven like a writing-desk?”

“come, we shall have some fun now!” thought alice. “i’m glad they’ve
begun asking riddles.—i believe i can guess that,” she added aloud.

“do you mean that you think you can find out the answer to it?” said
the march hare.

“exactly so,” said alice.

“then you should say what you mean,” the march hare went on.

“i do,” alice hastily replied; “at least—at least i mean what i
say—that’s the same thing, you know.”

“not the same thing a bit!” said the hatter. “you might just as well
say that ‘i see what i eat’ is the same thing as ‘i eat what i see’!”

“you might just as well say,” added the march hare, “that ‘i like what
i get’ is the same thing as ‘i get what i like’!”

“you might just as well say,” added the dormouse, who seemed to be
talking in his sleep, “that ‘i breathe when i sleep’ is the same thing
as ‘i sleep when i breathe’!”

“it _is_ the same thing with you,” said the hatter, and here the
conversation dropped, and the party sat silent for a minute, while
alice thought over all she could remember about ravens and
writing-desks, which wasn’t much.

the hatter was the first to break the silence. “what day of the month
is it?” he said, turning to alice: he had taken his watch out of his
pocket, and was looking at it uneasily, shaking it every now and then,
and holding it to his ear.

alice considered a little, and then said “the fourth.”

“two days wrong!” sighed the hatter. “i told you butter wouldn’t suit
the works!” he added looking angrily at the march hare.

“it was the _best_ butter,” the march hare meekly replied.

“yes, but some crumbs must have got in as well,” the hatter grumbled:
“you shouldn’t have put it in with the bread-knife.”

the march hare took the watch and looked at it gloomily: then he dipped
it into his cup of tea, and looked at it again: but he could think of
nothing better to say than his first remark, “it was the _best_ butter,
you know.”

alice had been looking over his shoulder with some curiosity. “what a
funny watch!” she remarked. “it tells the day of the month, and doesn’t
tell what o’clock it is!”

“why should it?” muttered the hatter. “does _your_ watch tell you what
year it is?”

“of course not,” alice replied very readily: “but that’s because it
stays the same year for such a long time together.”

“which is just the case with _mine_,” said the hatter.

alice felt dreadfully puzzled, the hatter’s remark seemed to have no
sort of meaning in it, and yet it was certainly english. “i don’t quite
understand you,” she said, as politely as she could.

“the dormouse is asleep again,” said the hatter, and he poured a little
hot tea upon its nose.

the dormouse shook its head impatiently, and said, without opening its
eyes, “of course, of course; just what i was going to remark myself.”

“have you guessed the riddle yet?” the hatter said, turning to alice
again.

“no, i give it up,” alice replied: “what’s the answer?”

“i haven’t the slightest idea,” said the hatter.

“nor i,” said the march hare.

alice sighed wearily. “i think you might do something better with the
time,” she said, “than waste it in asking riddles that have no
answers.”

“if you knew time as well as i do,” said the hatter, “you wouldn’t talk
about wasting _it_. it’s _him_.”

“i don’t know what you mean,” said alice.

“of course you don’t!” the hatter said, tossing his head
contemptuously. “i dare say you never even spoke to time!”

“perhaps not,” alice cautiously replied: “but i know i have to beat
time when i learn music.”

“ah! that accounts for it,” said the hatter. “he won’t stand beating.
now, if you only kept on good terms with him, he’d do almost anything
you liked with the clock. for instance, suppose it were nine o’clock in
the morning, just time to begin lessons: you’d only have to whisper a
hint to time, and round goes the clock in a twinkling! half-past one,
time for dinner!”

(“i only wish it was,” the march hare said to itself in a whisper.)

“that would be grand, certainly,” said alice thoughtfully: “but then—i
shouldn’t be hungry for it, you know.”

“not at first, perhaps,” said the hatter: “but you could keep it to
half-past one as long as you liked.”

“is that the way _you_ manage?” alice asked.

the hatter shook his head mournfully. “not i!” he replied. “we
quarrelled last march—just before _he_ went mad, you know—” (pointing
with his tea spoon at the march hare,) “—it was at the great concert
given by the queen of hearts, and i had to sing

‘twinkle, twinkle, little bat!
how i wonder what you’re at!’


you know the song, perhaps?”

“i’ve heard something like it,” said alice.

“it goes on, you know,” the hatter continued, “in this way:—

‘up above the world you fly,
like a tea-tray in the sky.
                    twinkle, twinkle—’”


here the dormouse shook itself, and began singing in its sleep
“_twinkle, twinkle, twinkle, twinkle_—” and went on so long that they
had to pinch it to make it stop.

“well, i’d hardly finished the first verse,” said the hatter, “when the
queen jumped up and bawled out, ‘he’s murdering the time! off with his
head!’”

“how dreadfully savage!” exclaimed alice.

“and ever since that,” the hatter went on in a mournful tone, “he won’t
do a thing i ask! it’s always six o’clock now.”

a bright idea came into alice’s head. “is that the reason so many
tea-things are put out here?” she asked.

“yes, that’s it,” said the hatter with a sigh: “it’s always tea-time,
and we’ve no time to wash the things between whiles.”

“then you keep moving round, i suppose?” said alice.

“exactly so,” said the hatter: “as the things get used up.”

“but what happens when you come to the beginning again?” alice ventured
to ask.

“suppose we change the subject,” the march hare interrupted, yawning.
“i’m getting tired of this. i vote the young lady tells us a story.”

“i’m afraid i don’t know one,” said alice, rather alarmed at the
proposal.

“then the dormouse shall!” they both cried. “wake up, dormouse!” and
they pinched it on both sides at once.

the dormouse slowly opened his eyes. “i wasn’t asleep,” he said in a
hoarse, feeble voice: “i heard every word you fellows were saying.”

“tell us a story!” said the march hare.

“yes, please do!” pleaded alice.

“and be quick about it,” added the hatter, “or you’ll be asleep again
before it’s done.”

“once upon a time there were three little sisters,” the dormouse began
in a great hurry; “and their names were elsie, lacie, and tillie; and
they lived at the bottom of a well—”

“what did they live on?” said alice, who always took a great interest
in questions of eating and drinking.

“they lived on treacle,” said the dormouse, after thinking a minute or
two.

“they couldn’t have done that, you know,” alice gently remarked;
“they’d have been ill.”

“so they were,” said the dormouse; “_very_ ill.”

alice tried to fancy to herself what such an extraordinary way of
living would be like, but it puzzled her too much, so she went on: “but
why did they live at the bottom of a well?”

“take some more tea,” the march hare said to alice, very earnestly.

“i’ve had nothing yet,” alice replied in an offended tone, “so i can’t
take more.”

“you mean you can’t take _less_,” said the hatter: “it’s very easy to
take _more_ than nothing.”

“nobody asked _your_ opinion,” said alice.

“who’s making personal remarks now?” the hatter asked triumphantly.

alice did not quite know what to say to this: so she helped herself to
some tea and bread-and-butter, and then turned to the dormouse, and
repeated her question. “why did they live at the bottom of a well?”

the dormouse again took a minute or two to think about it, and then
said, “it was a treacle-well.”

“there’s no such thing!” alice was beginning very angrily, but the
hatter and the march hare went “sh! sh!” and the dormouse sulkily
remarked, “if you can’t be civil, you’d better finish the story for
yourself.”

“no, please go on!” alice said very humbly; “i won’t interrupt again. i
dare say there may be _one_.”

“one, indeed!” said the dormouse indignantly. however, he consented to
go on. “and so these three little sisters—they were learning to draw,
you know—”

“what did they draw?” said alice, quite forgetting her promise.

“treacle,” said the dormouse, without considering at all this time.

“i want a clean cup,” interrupted the hatter: “let’s all move one place
on.”

he moved on as he spoke, and the dormouse followed him: the march hare
moved into the dormouse’s place, and alice rather unwillingly took the
place of the march hare. the hatter was the only one who got any
advantage from the change: and alice was a good deal worse off than
before, as the march hare had just upset the milk-jug into his plate.

alice did not wish to offend the dormouse again, so she began very
cautiously: “but i don’t understand. where did they draw the treacle
from?”

“you can draw water out of a water-well,” said the hatter; “so i should
think you could draw treacle out of a treacle-well—eh, stupid?”

“but they were _in_ the well,” alice said to the dormouse, not choosing
to notice this last remark.

“of course they were,” said the dormouse; “—well in.”

this answer so confused poor alice, that she let the dormouse go on for
some time without interrupting it.

“they were learning to draw,” the dormouse went on, yawning and rubbing
its eyes, for it was getting very sleepy; “and they drew all manner of
things—everything that begins with an m—”

“why with an m?” said alice.

“why not?” said the march hare.

alice was silent.

the dormouse had closed its eyes by this time, and was going off into a
doze; but, on being pinched by the hatter, it woke up again with a
little shriek, and went on: “—that begins with an m, such as
mouse-traps, and the moon, and memory, and muchness—you know you say
things are “much of a muchness”—did you ever see such a thing as a
drawing of a muchness?”

“really, now you ask me,” said alice, very much confused, “i don’t
think—”

“then you shouldn’t talk,” said the hatter.

this piece of rudeness was more than alice could bear: she got up in
great disgust, and walked off; the dormouse fell asleep instantly, and
neither of the others took the least notice of her going, though she
looked back once or twice, half hoping that they would call after her:
the last time she saw them, they were trying to put the dormouse into
the teapot.

“at any rate i’ll never go _there_ again!” said alice as she picked her
way through the wood. “it’s the stupidest tea-party i ever was at in
all my life!”

just as she said this, she noticed that one of the trees had a door
leading right into it. “that’s very curious!” she thought. “but
everything’s curious today. i think i may as well go in at once.” and
in she went.

once more she found herself in the long hall, and close to the little
glass table. “now, i’ll manage better this time,” she said to herself,
and began by taking the little golden key, and unlocking the door that
led into the garden. then she went to work nibbling at the mushroom
(she had kept a piece of it in her pocket) till she was about a foot
high: then she walked down the little passage: and _then_—she found
herself at last in the beautiful garden, among the bright flower-beds
and the cool fountains.




chapter viii.
the queen’s croquet-ground


a large rose-tree stood near the entrance of the garden: the roses
growing on it were white, but there were three gardeners at it, busily
painting them red. alice thought this a very curious thing, and she
went nearer to watch them, and just as she came up to them she heard
one of them say, “look out now, five! don’t go splashing paint over me
like that!”

“i couldn’t help it,” said five, in a sulky tone; “seven jogged my
elbow.”

on which seven looked up and said, “that’s right, five! always lay the
blame on others!”

“_you’d_ better not talk!” said five. “i heard the queen say only
yesterday you deserved to be beheaded!”

“what for?” said the one who had spoken first.

“that’s none of _your_ business, two!” said seven.

“yes, it _is_ his business!” said five, “and i’ll tell him—it was for
bringing the cook tulip-roots instead of onions.”

seven flung down his brush, and had just begun “well, of all the unjust
things—” when his eye chanced to fall upon alice, as she stood watching
them, and he checked himself suddenly: the others looked round also,
and all of them bowed low.

“would you tell me,” said alice, a little timidly, “why you are
painting those roses?”

five and seven said nothing, but looked at two. two began in a low
voice, “why the fact is, you see, miss, this here ought to have been a
_red_ rose-tree, and we put a white one in by mistake; and if the queen
was to find it out, we should all have our heads cut off, you know. so
you see, miss, we’re doing our best, afore she comes, to—” at this
moment five, who had been anxiously looking across the garden, called
out “the queen! the queen!” and the three gardeners instantly threw
themselves flat upon their faces. there was a sound of many footsteps,
and alice looked round, eager to see the queen.

first came ten soldiers carrying clubs; these were all shaped like the
three gardeners, oblong and flat, with their hands and feet at the
corners: next the ten courtiers; these were ornamented all over with
diamonds, and walked two and two, as the soldiers did. after these came
the royal children; there were ten of them, and the little dears came
jumping merrily along hand in hand, in couples: they were all
ornamented with hearts. next came the guests, mostly kings and queens,
and among them alice recognised the white rabbit: it was talking in a
hurried nervous manner, smiling at everything that was said, and went
by without noticing her. then followed the knave of hearts, carrying
the king’s crown on a crimson velvet cushion; and, last of all this
grand procession, came the king and queen of hearts.

alice was rather doubtful whether she ought not to lie down on her face
like the three gardeners, but she could not remember ever having heard
of such a rule at processions; “and besides, what would be the use of a
procession,” thought she, “if people had all to lie down upon their
faces, so that they couldn’t see it?” so she stood still where she was,
and waited.

when the procession came opposite to alice, they all stopped and looked
at her, and the queen said severely “who is this?” she said it to the
knave of hearts, who only bowed and smiled in reply.

“idiot!” said the queen, tossing her head impatiently; and, turning to
alice, she went on, “what’s your name, child?”

“my name is alice, so please your majesty,” said alice very politely;
but she added, to herself, “why, they’re only a pack of cards, after
all. i needn’t be afraid of them!”

“and who are _these?_” said the queen, pointing to the three gardeners
who were lying round the rose-tree; for, you see, as they were lying on
their faces, and the pattern on their backs was the same as the rest of
the pack, she could not tell whether they were gardeners, or soldiers,
or courtiers, or three of her own children.

“how should _i_ know?” said alice, surprised at her own courage. “it’s
no business of _mine_.”

the queen turned crimson with fury, and, after glaring at her for a
moment like a wild beast, screamed “off with her head! off—”

“nonsense!” said alice, very loudly and decidedly, and the queen was
silent.

the king laid his hand upon her arm, and timidly said “consider, my
dear: she is only a child!”

the queen turned angrily away from him, and said to the knave “turn
them over!”

the knave did so, very carefully, with one foot.

“get up!” said the queen, in a shrill, loud voice, and the three
gardeners instantly jumped up, and began bowing to the king, the queen,
the royal children, and everybody else.

“leave off that!” screamed the queen. “you make me giddy.” and then,
turning to the rose-tree, she went on, “what _have_ you been doing
here?”

“may it please your majesty,” said two, in a very humble tone, going
down on one knee as he spoke, “we were trying—”

“_i_ see!” said the queen, who had meanwhile been examining the roses.
“off with their heads!” and the procession moved on, three of the
soldiers remaining behind to execute the unfortunate gardeners, who ran
to alice for protection.

“you shan’t be beheaded!” said alice, and she put them into a large
flower-pot that stood near. the three soldiers wandered about for a
minute or two, looking for them, and then quietly marched off after the
others.

“are their heads off?” shouted the queen.

“their heads are gone, if it please your majesty!” the soldiers shouted
in reply.

“that’s right!” shouted the queen. “can you play croquet?”

the soldiers were silent, and looked at alice, as the question was
evidently meant for her.

“yes!” shouted alice.

“come on, then!” roared the queen, and alice joined the procession,
wondering very much what would happen next.

“it’s—it’s a very fine day!” said a timid voice at her side. she was
walking by the white rabbit, who was peeping anxiously into her face.

“very,” said alice: “—where’s the duchess?”

“hush! hush!” said the rabbit in a low, hurried tone. he looked
anxiously over his shoulder as he spoke, and then raised himself upon
tiptoe, put his mouth close to her ear, and whispered “she’s under
sentence of execution.”

“what for?” said alice.

“did you say ‘what a pity!’?” the rabbit asked.

“no, i didn’t,” said alice: “i don’t think it’s at all a pity. i said
‘what for?’”

“she boxed the queen’s ears—” the rabbit began. alice gave a little
scream of laughter. “oh, hush!” the rabbit whispered in a frightened
tone. “the queen will hear you! you see, she came rather late, and the
queen said—”

“get to your places!” shouted the queen in a voice of thunder, and
people began running about in all directions, tumbling up against each
other; however, they got settled down in a minute or two, and the game
began. alice thought she had never seen such a curious croquet-ground
in her life; it was all ridges and furrows; the balls were live
hedgehogs, the mallets live flamingoes, and the soldiers had to double
themselves up and to stand on their hands and feet, to make the arches.

the chief difficulty alice found at first was in managing her flamingo:
she succeeded in getting its body tucked away, comfortably enough,
under her arm, with its legs hanging down, but generally, just as she
had got its neck nicely straightened out, and was going to give the
hedgehog a blow with its head, it _would_ twist itself round and look
up in her face, with such a puzzled expression that she could not help
bursting out laughing: and when she had got its head down, and was
going to begin again, it was very provoking to find that the hedgehog
had unrolled itself, and was in the act of crawling away: besides all
this, there was generally a ridge or furrow in the way wherever she
wanted to send the hedgehog to, and, as the doubled-up soldiers were
always getting up and walking off to other parts of the ground, alice
soon came to the conclusion that it was a very difficult game indeed.

the players all played at once without waiting for turns, quarrelling
all the while, and fighting for the hedgehogs; and in a very short time
the queen was in a furious passion, and went stamping about, and
shouting “off with his head!” or “off with her head!” about once in a
minute.

alice began to feel very uneasy: to be sure, she had not as yet had any
dispute with the queen, but she knew that it might happen any minute,
“and then,” thought she, “what would become of me? they’re dreadfully
fond of beheading people here; the great wonder is, that there’s any
one left alive!”

she was looking about for some way of escape, and wondering whether she
could get away without being seen, when she noticed a curious
appearance in the air: it puzzled her very much at first, but, after
watching it a minute or two, she made it out to be a grin, and she said
to herself “it’s the cheshire cat: now i shall have somebody to talk
to.”

“how are you getting on?” said the cat, as soon as there was mouth
enough for it to speak with.

alice waited till the eyes appeared, and then nodded. “it’s no use
speaking to it,” she thought, “till its ears have come, or at least one
of them.” in another minute the whole head appeared, and then alice put
down her flamingo, and began an account of the game, feeling very glad
she had someone to listen to her. the cat seemed to think that there
was enough of it now in sight, and no more of it appeared.

“i don’t think they play at all fairly,” alice began, in rather a
complaining tone, “and they all quarrel so dreadfully one can’t hear
oneself speak—and they don’t seem to have any rules in particular; at
least, if there are, nobody attends to them—and you’ve no idea how
confusing it is all the things being alive; for instance, there’s the
arch i’ve got to go through next walking about at the other end of the
ground—and i should have croqueted the queen’s hedgehog just now, only
it ran away when it saw mine coming!”

“how do you like the queen?” said the cat in a low voice.

“not at all,” said alice: “she’s so extremely—” just then she noticed
that the queen was close behind her, listening: so she went on,
“—likely to win, that it’s hardly worth while finishing the game.”

the queen smiled and passed on.

“who _are_ you talking to?” said the king, going up to alice, and
looking at the cat’s head with great curiosity.

“it’s a friend of mine—a cheshire cat,” said alice: “allow me to
introduce it.”

“i don’t like the look of it at all,” said the king: “however, it may
kiss my hand if it likes.”

“i’d rather not,” the cat remarked.

“don’t be impertinent,” said the king, “and don’t look at me like
that!” he got behind alice as he spoke.

“a cat may look at a king,” said alice. “i’ve read that in some book,
but i don’t remember where.”

“well, it must be removed,” said the king very decidedly, and he called
the queen, who was passing at the moment, “my dear! i wish you would
have this cat removed!”

the queen had only one way of settling all difficulties, great or
small. “off with his head!” she said, without even looking round.

“i’ll fetch the executioner myself,” said the king eagerly, and he
hurried off.

alice thought she might as well go back, and see how the game was going
on, as she heard the queen’s voice in the distance, screaming with
passion. she had already heard her sentence three of the players to be
executed for having missed their turns, and she did not like the look
of things at all, as the game was in such confusion that she never knew
whether it was her turn or not. so she went in search of her hedgehog.

the hedgehog was engaged in a fight with another hedgehog, which seemed
to alice an excellent opportunity for croqueting one of them with the
other: the only difficulty was, that her flamingo was gone across to
the other side of the garden, where alice could see it trying in a
helpless sort of way to fly up into a tree.

by the time she had caught the flamingo and brought it back, the fight
was over, and both the hedgehogs were out of sight: “but it doesn’t
matter much,” thought alice, “as all the arches are gone from this side
of the ground.” so she tucked it away under her arm, that it might not
escape again, and went back for a little more conversation with her
friend.

when she got back to the cheshire cat, she was surprised to find quite
a large crowd collected round it: there was a dispute going on between
the executioner, the king, and the queen, who were all talking at once,
while all the rest were quite silent, and looked very uncomfortable.

the moment alice appeared, she was appealed to by all three to settle
the question, and they repeated their arguments to her, though, as they
all spoke at once, she found it very hard indeed to make out exactly
what they said.

the executioner’s argument was, that you couldn’t cut off a head unless
there was a body to cut it off from: that he had never had to do such a
thing before, and he wasn’t going to begin at _his_ time of life.

the king’s argument was, that anything that had a head could be
beheaded, and that you weren’t to talk nonsense.

the queen’s argument was, that if something wasn’t done about it in
less than no time she’d have everybody executed, all round. (it was
this last remark that had made the whole party look so grave and
anxious.)

alice could think of nothing else to say but “it belongs to the
duchess: you’d better ask _her_ about it.”

“she’s in prison,” the queen said to the executioner: “fetch her here.”
and the executioner went off like an arrow.

the cat’s head began fading away the moment he was gone, and, by the
time he had come back with the duchess, it had entirely disappeared; so
the king and the executioner ran wildly up and down looking for it,
while the rest of the party went back to the game.




chapter ix.
the mock turtle’s story


“you can’t think how glad i am to see you again, you dear old thing!”
said the duchess, as she tucked her arm affectionately into alice’s,
and they walked off together.

alice was very glad to find her in such a pleasant temper, and thought
to herself that perhaps it was only the pepper that had made her so
savage when they met in the kitchen.

“when _i’m_ a duchess,” she said to herself, (not in a very hopeful
tone though), “i won’t have any pepper in my kitchen _at all_. soup
does very well without—maybe it’s always pepper that makes people
hot-tempered,” she went on, very much pleased at having found out a new
kind of rule, “and vinegar that makes them sour—and camomile that makes
them bitter—and—and barley-sugar and such things that make children
sweet-tempered. i only wish people knew _that_: then they wouldn’t be
so stingy about it, you know—”

she had quite forgotten the duchess by this time, and was a little
startled when she heard her voice close to her ear. “you’re thinking
about something, my dear, and that makes you forget to talk. i can’t
tell you just now what the moral of that is, but i shall remember it in
a bit.”

“perhaps it hasn’t one,” alice ventured to remark.

“tut, tut, child!” said the duchess. “everything’s got a moral, if only
you can find it.” and she squeezed herself up closer to alice’s side as
she spoke.

alice did not much like keeping so close to her: first, because the
duchess was _very_ ugly; and secondly, because she was exactly the
right height to rest her chin upon alice’s shoulder, and it was an
uncomfortably sharp chin. however, she did not like to be rude, so she
bore it as well as she could.

“the game’s going on rather better now,” she said, by way of keeping up
the conversation a little.

“’tis so,” said the duchess: “and the moral of that is—‘oh, ’tis love,
’tis love, that makes the world go round!’”

“somebody said,” alice whispered, “that it’s done by everybody minding
their own business!”

“ah, well! it means much the same thing,” said the duchess, digging her
sharp little chin into alice’s shoulder as she added, “and the moral of
_that_ is—‘take care of the sense, and the sounds will take care of
themselves.’”

“how fond she is of finding morals in things!” alice thought to
herself.

“i dare say you’re wondering why i don’t put my arm round your waist,”
the duchess said after a pause: “the reason is, that i’m doubtful about
the temper of your flamingo. shall i try the experiment?”

“he might bite,” alice cautiously replied, not feeling at all anxious
to have the experiment tried.

“very true,” said the duchess: “flamingoes and mustard both bite. and
the moral of that is—‘birds of a feather flock together.’”

“only mustard isn’t a bird,” alice remarked.

“right, as usual,” said the duchess: “what a clear way you have of
putting things!”

“it’s a mineral, i _think_,” said alice.

“of course it is,” said the duchess, who seemed ready to agree to
everything that alice said; “there’s a large mustard-mine near here.
and the moral of that is—‘the more there is of mine, the less there is
of yours.’”

“oh, i know!” exclaimed alice, who had not attended to this last
remark, “it’s a vegetable. it doesn’t look like one, but it is.”

“i quite agree with you,” said the duchess; “and the moral of that
is—‘be what you would seem to be’—or if you’d like it put more
simply—‘never imagine yourself not to be otherwise than what it might
appear to others that what you were or might have been was not
otherwise than what you had been would have appeared to them to be
otherwise.’”

“i think i should understand that better,” alice said very politely,
“if i had it written down: but i can’t quite follow it as you say it.”

“that’s nothing to what i could say if i chose,” the duchess replied,
in a pleased tone.

“pray don’t trouble yourself to say it any longer than that,” said
alice.

“oh, don’t talk about trouble!” said the duchess. “i make you a present
of everything i’ve said as yet.”

“a cheap sort of present!” thought alice. “i’m glad they don’t give
birthday presents like that!” but she did not venture to say it out
loud.

“thinking again?” the duchess asked, with another dig of her sharp
little chin.

“i’ve a right to think,” said alice sharply, for she was beginning to
feel a little worried.

“just about as much right,” said the duchess, “as pigs have to fly; and
the m—”

but here, to alice’s great surprise, the duchess’s voice died away,
even in the middle of her favourite word ‘moral,’ and the arm that was
linked into hers began to tremble. alice looked up, and there stood the
queen in front of them, with her arms folded, frowning like a
thunderstorm.

“a fine day, your majesty!” the duchess began in a low, weak voice.

“now, i give you fair warning,” shouted the queen, stamping on the
ground as she spoke; “either you or your head must be off, and that in
about half no time! take your choice!”

the duchess took her choice, and was gone in a moment.

“let’s go on with the game,” the queen said to alice; and alice was too
much frightened to say a word, but slowly followed her back to the
croquet-ground.

the other guests had taken advantage of the queen’s absence, and were
resting in the shade: however, the moment they saw her, they hurried
back to the game, the queen merely remarking that a moment’s delay
would cost them their lives.

all the time they were playing the queen never left off quarrelling
with the other players, and shouting “off with his head!” or “off with
her head!” those whom she sentenced were taken into custody by the
soldiers, who of course had to leave off being arches to do this, so
that by the end of half an hour or so there were no arches left, and
all the players, except the king, the queen, and alice, were in custody
and under sentence of execution.

then the queen left off, quite out of breath, and said to alice, “have
you seen the mock turtle yet?”

“no,” said alice. “i don’t even know what a mock turtle is.”

“it’s the thing mock turtle soup is made from,” said the queen.

“i never saw one, or heard of one,” said alice.

“come on, then,” said the queen, “and he shall tell you his history.”

as they walked off together, alice heard the king say in a low voice,
to the company generally, “you are all pardoned.” “come, _that’s_ a
good thing!” she said to herself, for she had felt quite unhappy at the
number of executions the queen had ordered.

they very soon came upon a gryphon, lying fast asleep in the sun. (if
you don’t know what a gryphon is, look at the picture.) “up, lazy
thing!” said the queen, “and take this young lady to see the mock
turtle, and to hear his history. i must go back and see after some
executions i have ordered;” and she walked off, leaving alice alone
with the gryphon. alice did not quite like the look of the creature,
but on the whole she thought it would be quite as safe to stay with it
as to go after that savage queen: so she waited.

the gryphon sat up and rubbed its eyes: then it watched the queen till
she was out of sight: then it chuckled. “what fun!” said the gryphon,
half to itself, half to alice.

“what _is_ the fun?” said alice.

“why, _she_,” said the gryphon. “it’s all her fancy, that: they never
executes nobody, you know. come on!”

“everybody says ‘come on!’ here,” thought alice, as she went slowly
after it: “i never was so ordered about in all my life, never!”

they had not gone far before they saw the mock turtle in the distance,
sitting sad and lonely on a little ledge of rock, and, as they came
nearer, alice could hear him sighing as if his heart would break. she
pitied him deeply. “what is his sorrow?” she asked the gryphon, and the
gryphon answered, very nearly in the same words as before, “it’s all
his fancy, that: he hasn’t got no sorrow, you know. come on!”

so they went up to the mock turtle, who looked at them with large eyes
full of tears, but said nothing.

“this here young lady,” said the gryphon, “she wants for to know your
history, she do.”

“i’ll tell it her,” said the mock turtle in a deep, hollow tone: “sit
down, both of you, and don’t speak a word till i’ve finished.”

so they sat down, and nobody spoke for some minutes. alice thought to
herself, “i don’t see how he can _ever_ finish, if he doesn’t begin.”
but she waited patiently.

“once,” said the mock turtle at last, with a deep sigh, “i was a real
turtle.”

these words were followed by a very long silence, broken only by an
occasional exclamation of “hjckrrh!” from the gryphon, and the constant
heavy sobbing of the mock turtle. alice was very nearly getting up and
saying, “thank you, sir, for your interesting story,” but she could not
help thinking there _must_ be more to come, so she sat still and said
nothing.

“when we were little,” the mock turtle went on at last, more calmly,
though still sobbing a little now and then, “we went to school in the
sea. the master was an old turtle—we used to call him tortoise—”

“why did you call him tortoise, if he wasn’t one?” alice asked.

“we called him tortoise because he taught us,” said the mock turtle
angrily: “really you are very dull!”

“you ought to be ashamed of yourself for asking such a simple
question,” added the gryphon; and then they both sat silent and looked
at poor alice, who felt ready to sink into the earth. at last the
gryphon said to the mock turtle, “drive on, old fellow! don’t be all
day about it!” and he went on in these words:

“yes, we went to school in the sea, though you mayn’t believe it—”

“i never said i didn’t!” interrupted alice.

“you did,” said the mock turtle.

“hold your tongue!” added the gryphon, before alice could speak again.
the mock turtle went on.

“we had the best of educations—in fact, we went to school every day—”

“_i’ve_ been to a day-school, too,” said alice; “you needn’t be so
proud as all that.”

“with extras?” asked the mock turtle a little anxiously.

“yes,” said alice, “we learned french and music.”

“and washing?” said the mock turtle.

“certainly not!” said alice indignantly.

“ah! then yours wasn’t a really good school,” said the mock turtle in a
tone of great relief. “now at _ours_ they had at the end of the bill,
‘french, music, _and washing_—extra.’”

“you couldn’t have wanted it much,” said alice; “living at the bottom
of the sea.”

“i couldn’t afford to learn it.” said the mock turtle with a sigh. “i
only took the regular course.”

“what was that?” inquired alice.

“reeling and writhing, of course, to begin with,” the mock turtle
replied; “and then the different branches of arithmetic—ambition,
distraction, uglification, and derision.”

“i never heard of ‘uglification,’” alice ventured to say. “what is it?”

the gryphon lifted up both its paws in surprise. “what! never heard of
uglifying!” it exclaimed. “you know what to beautify is, i suppose?”

“yes,” said alice doubtfully: “it means—to—make—anything—prettier.”

“well, then,” the gryphon went on, “if you don’t know what to uglify
is, you _are_ a simpleton.”

alice did not feel encouraged to ask any more questions about it, so
she turned to the mock turtle, and said “what else had you to learn?”

“well, there was mystery,” the mock turtle replied, counting off the
subjects on his flappers, “—mystery, ancient and modern, with
seaography: then drawling—the drawling-master was an old conger-eel,
that used to come once a week: _he_ taught us drawling, stretching, and
fainting in coils.”

“what was _that_ like?” said alice.

“well, i can’t show it you myself,” the mock turtle said: “i’m too
stiff. and the gryphon never learnt it.”

“hadn’t time,” said the gryphon: “i went to the classics master,
though. he was an old crab, _he_ was.”

“i never went to him,” the mock turtle said with a sigh: “he taught
laughing and grief, they used to say.”

“so he did, so he did,” said the gryphon, sighing in his turn; and both
creatures hid their faces in their paws.

“and how many hours a day did you do lessons?” said alice, in a hurry
to change the subject.

“ten hours the first day,” said the mock turtle: “nine the next, and so
on.”

“what a curious plan!” exclaimed alice.

“that’s the reason they’re called lessons,” the gryphon remarked:
“because they lessen from day to day.”

this was quite a new idea to alice, and she thought it over a little
before she made her next remark. “then the eleventh day must have been
a holiday?”

“of course it was,” said the mock turtle.

“and how did you manage on the twelfth?” alice went on eagerly.

“that’s enough about lessons,” the gryphon interrupted in a very
decided tone: “tell her something about the games now.”




chapter x.
the lobster quadrille


the mock turtle sighed deeply, and drew the back of one flapper across
his eyes. he looked at alice, and tried to speak, but for a minute or
two sobs choked his voice. “same as if he had a bone in his throat,”
said the gryphon: and it set to work shaking him and punching him in
the back. at last the mock turtle recovered his voice, and, with tears
running down his cheeks, he went on again:—

“you may not have lived much under the sea—” (“i haven’t,” said
alice)—“and perhaps you were never even introduced to a lobster—”
(alice began to say “i once tasted—” but checked herself hastily, and
said “no, never”) “—so you can have no idea what a delightful thing a
lobster quadrille is!”

“no, indeed,” said alice. “what sort of a dance is it?”

“why,” said the gryphon, “you first form into a line along the
sea-shore—”

“two lines!” cried the mock turtle. “seals, turtles, salmon, and so on;
then, when you’ve cleared all the jelly-fish out of the way—”

“_that_ generally takes some time,” interrupted the gryphon.

“—you advance twice—”

“each with a lobster as a partner!” cried the gryphon.

“of course,” the mock turtle said: “advance twice, set to partners—”

“—change lobsters, and retire in same order,” continued the gryphon.

“then, you know,” the mock turtle went on, “you throw the—”

“the lobsters!” shouted the gryphon, with a bound into the air.

“—as far out to sea as you can—”

“swim after them!” screamed the gryphon.

“turn a somersault in the sea!” cried the mock turtle, capering wildly
about.

“change lobsters again!” yelled the gryphon at the top of its voice.

“back to land again, and that’s all the first figure,” said the mock
turtle, suddenly dropping his voice; and the two creatures, who had
been jumping about like mad things all this time, sat down again very
sadly and quietly, and looked at alice.

“it must be a very pretty dance,” said alice timidly.

“would you like to see a little of it?” said the mock turtle.

“very much indeed,” said alice.

“come, let’s try the first figure!” said the mock turtle to the
gryphon. “we can do without lobsters, you know. which shall sing?”

“oh, _you_ sing,” said the gryphon. “i’ve forgotten the words.”

so they began solemnly dancing round and round alice, every now and
then treading on her toes when they passed too close, and waving their
forepaws to mark the time, while the mock turtle sang this, very slowly
and sadly:—

“will you walk a little faster?” said a whiting to a snail.
“there’s a porpoise close behind us, and he’s treading on my tail.
see how eagerly the lobsters and the turtles all advance!
they are waiting on the shingle—will you come and join the dance?
will you, won’t you, will you, won’t you, will you join the dance?
will you, won’t you, will you, won’t you, won’t you join the dance?

“you can really have no notion how delightful it will be
when they take us up and throw us, with the lobsters, out to sea!”
but the snail replied “too far, too far!” and gave a look askance—
said he thanked the whiting kindly, but he would not join the dance.
would not, could not, would not, could not, would not join the dance.
would not, could not, would not, could not, could not join the dance.

“what matters it how far we go?” his scaly friend replied.
“there is another shore, you know, upon the other side.
the further off from england the nearer is to france—
then turn not pale, beloved snail, but come and join the dance.
will you, won’t you, will you, won’t you, will you join the dance?
will you, won’t you, will you, won’t you, won’t you join the dance?”


“thank you, it’s a very interesting dance to watch,” said alice,
feeling very glad that it was over at last: “and i do so like that
curious song about the whiting!”

“oh, as to the whiting,” said the mock turtle, “they—you’ve seen them,
of course?”

“yes,” said alice, “i’ve often seen them at dinn—” she checked herself
hastily.

“i don’t know where dinn may be,” said the mock turtle, “but if you’ve
seen them so often, of course you know what they’re like.”

“i believe so,” alice replied thoughtfully. “they have their tails in
their mouths—and they’re all over crumbs.”

“you’re wrong about the crumbs,” said the mock turtle: “crumbs would
all wash off in the sea. but they _have_ their tails in their mouths;
and the reason is—” here the mock turtle yawned and shut his
eyes.—“tell her about the reason and all that,” he said to the gryphon.

“the reason is,” said the gryphon, “that they _would_ go with the
lobsters to the dance. so they got thrown out to sea. so they had to
fall a long way. so they got their tails fast in their mouths. so they
couldn’t get them out again. that’s all.”

“thank you,” said alice, “it’s very interesting. i never knew so much
about a whiting before.”

“i can tell you more than that, if you like,” said the gryphon. “do you
know why it’s called a whiting?”

“i never thought about it,” said alice. “why?”

“_it does the boots and shoes_,” the gryphon replied very solemnly.

alice was thoroughly puzzled. “does the boots and shoes!” she repeated
in a wondering tone.

“why, what are _your_ shoes done with?” said the gryphon. “i mean, what
makes them so shiny?”

alice looked down at them, and considered a little before she gave her
answer. “they’re done with blacking, i believe.”

“boots and shoes under the sea,” the gryphon went on in a deep voice,
“are done with a whiting. now you know.”

“and what are they made of?” alice asked in a tone of great curiosity.

“soles and eels, of course,” the gryphon replied rather impatiently:
“any shrimp could have told you that.”

“if i’d been the whiting,” said alice, whose thoughts were still
running on the song, “i’d have said to the porpoise, ‘keep back,
please: we don’t want _you_ with us!’”

“they were obliged to have him with them,” the mock turtle said: “no
wise fish would go anywhere without a porpoise.”

“wouldn’t it really?” said alice in a tone of great surprise.

“of course not,” said the mock turtle: “why, if a fish came to _me_,
and told me he was going a journey, i should say ‘with what porpoise?’”

“don’t you mean ‘purpose’?” said alice.

“i mean what i say,” the mock turtle replied in an offended tone. and
the gryphon added “come, let’s hear some of _your_ adventures.”

“i could tell you my adventures—beginning from this morning,” said
alice a little timidly: “but it’s no use going back to yesterday,
because i was a different person then.”

“explain all that,” said the mock turtle.

“no, no! the adventures first,” said the gryphon in an impatient tone:
“explanations take such a dreadful time.”

so alice began telling them her adventures from the time when she first
saw the white rabbit. she was a little nervous about it just at first,
the two creatures got so close to her, one on each side, and opened
their eyes and mouths so _very_ wide, but she gained courage as she
went on. her listeners were perfectly quiet till she got to the part
about her repeating “_you are old, father william_,” to the
caterpillar, and the words all coming different, and then the mock
turtle drew a long breath, and said “that’s very curious.”

“it’s all about as curious as it can be,” said the gryphon.

“it all came different!” the mock turtle repeated thoughtfully. “i
should like to hear her try and repeat something now. tell her to
begin.” he looked at the gryphon as if he thought it had some kind of
authority over alice.

“stand up and repeat ‘’_tis the voice of the sluggard_,’” said the
gryphon.

“how the creatures order one about, and make one repeat lessons!”
thought alice; “i might as well be at school at once.” however, she got
up, and began to repeat it, but her head was so full of the lobster
quadrille, that she hardly knew what she was saying, and the words came
very queer indeed:—

“’tis the voice of the lobster; i heard him declare,
“you have baked me too brown, i must sugar my hair.”
as a duck with its eyelids, so he with his nose
trims his belt and his buttons, and turns out his toes.”

[later editions continued as follows
when the sands are all dry, he is gay as a lark,
and will talk in contemptuous tones of the shark,
but, when the tide rises and sharks are around,
his voice has a timid and tremulous sound.]


“that’s different from what _i_ used to say when i was a child,” said
the gryphon.

“well, i never heard it before,” said the mock turtle; “but it sounds
uncommon nonsense.”

alice said nothing; she had sat down with her face in her hands,
wondering if anything would _ever_ happen in a natural way again.

“i should like to have it explained,” said the mock turtle.

“she can’t explain it,” said the gryphon hastily. “go on with the next
verse.”

“but about his toes?” the mock turtle persisted. “how _could_ he turn
them out with his nose, you know?”

“it’s the first position in dancing.” alice said; but was dreadfully
puzzled by the whole thing, and longed to change the subject.

“go on with the next verse,” the gryphon repeated impatiently: “it
begins ‘_i passed by his garden_.’”

alice did not dare to disobey, though she felt sure it would all come
wrong, and she went on in a trembling voice:—

“i passed by his garden, and marked, with one eye,
how the owl and the panther were sharing a pie—”

[later editions continued as follows
the panther took pie-crust, and gravy, and meat,
while the owl had the dish as its share of the treat.
when the pie was all finished, the owl, as a boon,
was kindly permitted to pocket the spoon:
while the panther received knife and fork with a growl,
and concluded the banquet—]


“what _is_ the use of repeating all that stuff,” the mock turtle
interrupted, “if you don’t explain it as you go on? it’s by far the
most confusing thing _i_ ever heard!”

“yes, i think you’d better leave off,” said the gryphon: and alice was
only too glad to do so.

“shall we try another figure of the lobster quadrille?” the gryphon
went on. “or would you like the mock turtle to sing you a song?”

“oh, a song, please, if the mock turtle would be so kind,” alice
replied, so eagerly that the gryphon said, in a rather offended tone,
“hm! no accounting for tastes! sing her ‘_turtle soup_,’ will you, old
fellow?”

the mock turtle sighed deeply, and began, in a voice sometimes choked
with sobs, to sing this:—

“beautiful soup, so rich and green,
waiting in a hot tureen!
who for such dainties would not stoop?
soup of the evening, beautiful soup!
soup of the evening, beautiful soup!
    beau—ootiful soo—oop!
    beau—ootiful soo—oop!
soo—oop of the e—e—evening,
    beautiful, beautiful soup!

“beautiful soup! who cares for fish,
game, or any other dish?
who would not give all else for two p
ennyworth only of beautiful soup?
pennyworth only of beautiful soup?
    beau—ootiful soo—oop!
    beau—ootiful soo—oop!
soo—oop of the e—e—evening,
    beautiful, beauti—ful soup!”


“chorus again!” cried the gryphon, and the mock turtle had just begun
to repeat it, when a cry of “the trial’s beginning!” was heard in the
distance.

“come on!” cried the gryphon, and, taking alice by the hand, it hurried
off, without waiting for the end of the song.

“what trial is it?” alice panted as she ran; but the gryphon only
answered “come on!” and ran the faster, while more and more faintly
came, carried on the breeze that followed them, the melancholy words:—

“soo—oop of the e—e—evening,
    beautiful, beautiful soup!”




chapter xi.
who stole the tarts?


the king and queen of hearts were seated on their throne when they
arrived, with a great crowd assembled about them—all sorts of little
birds and beasts, as well as the whole pack of cards: the knave was
standing before them, in chains, with a soldier on each side to guard
him; and near the king was the white rabbit, with a trumpet in one
hand, and a scroll of parchment in the other. in the very middle of the
court was a table, with a large dish of tarts upon it: they looked so
good, that it made alice quite hungry to look at them—“i wish they’d
get the trial done,” she thought, “and hand round the refreshments!”
but there seemed to be no chance of this, so she began looking at
everything about her, to pass away the time.

alice had never been in a court of justice before, but she had read
about them in books, and she was quite pleased to find that she knew
the name of nearly everything there. “that’s the judge,” she said to
herself, “because of his great wig.”

the judge, by the way, was the king; and as he wore his crown over the
wig, (look at the frontispiece if you want to see how he did it,) he
did not look at all comfortable, and it was certainly not becoming.

“and that’s the jury-box,” thought alice, “and those twelve creatures,”
(she was obliged to say “creatures,” you see, because some of them were
animals, and some were birds,) “i suppose they are the jurors.” she
said this last word two or three times over to herself, being rather
proud of it: for she thought, and rightly too, that very few little
girls of her age knew the meaning of it at all. however, “jury-men”
would have done just as well.

the twelve jurors were all writing very busily on slates. “what are
they doing?” alice whispered to the gryphon. “they can’t have anything
to put down yet, before the trial’s begun.”

“they’re putting down their names,” the gryphon whispered in reply,
“for fear they should forget them before the end of the trial.”

“stupid things!” alice began in a loud, indignant voice, but she
stopped hastily, for the white rabbit cried out, “silence in the
court!” and the king put on his spectacles and looked anxiously round,
to make out who was talking.

alice could see, as well as if she were looking over their shoulders,
that all the jurors were writing down “stupid things!” on their slates,
and she could even make out that one of them didn’t know how to spell
“stupid,” and that he had to ask his neighbour to tell him. “a nice
muddle their slates’ll be in before the trial’s over!” thought alice.

one of the jurors had a pencil that squeaked. this of course, alice
could _not_ stand, and she went round the court and got behind him, and
very soon found an opportunity of taking it away. she did it so quickly
that the poor little juror (it was bill, the lizard) could not make out
at all what had become of it; so, after hunting all about for it, he
was obliged to write with one finger for the rest of the day; and this
was of very little use, as it left no mark on the slate.

“herald, read the accusation!” said the king.

on this the white rabbit blew three blasts on the trumpet, and then
unrolled the parchment scroll, and read as follows:—

“the queen of hearts, she made some tarts,
    all on a summer day:
the knave of hearts, he stole those tarts,
    and took them quite away!”


“consider your verdict,” the king said to the jury.

“not yet, not yet!” the rabbit hastily interrupted. “there’s a great
deal to come before that!”

“call the first witness,” said the king; and the white rabbit blew
three blasts on the trumpet, and called out, “first witness!”

the first witness was the hatter. he came in with a teacup in one hand
and a piece of bread-and-butter in the other. “i beg pardon, your
majesty,” he began, “for bringing these in: but i hadn’t quite finished
my tea when i was sent for.”

“you ought to have finished,” said the king. “when did you begin?”

the hatter looked at the march hare, who had followed him into the
court, arm-in-arm with the dormouse. “fourteenth of march, i _think_ it
was,” he said.

“fifteenth,” said the march hare.

“sixteenth,” added the dormouse.

“write that down,” the king said to the jury, and the jury eagerly
wrote down all three dates on their slates, and then added them up, and
reduced the answer to shillings and pence.

“take off your hat,” the king said to the hatter.

“it isn’t mine,” said the hatter.

“_stolen!_” the king exclaimed, turning to the jury, who instantly made
a memorandum of the fact.

“i keep them to sell,” the hatter added as an explanation; “i’ve none
of my own. i’m a hatter.”

here the queen put on her spectacles, and began staring at the hatter,
who turned pale and fidgeted.

“give your evidence,” said the king; “and don’t be nervous, or i’ll
have you executed on the spot.”

this did not seem to encourage the witness at all: he kept shifting
from one foot to the other, looking uneasily at the queen, and in his
confusion he bit a large piece out of his teacup instead of the
bread-and-butter.

just at this moment alice felt a very curious sensation, which puzzled
her a good deal until she made out what it was: she was beginning to
grow larger again, and she thought at first she would get up and leave
the court; but on second thoughts she decided to remain where she was
as long as there was room for her.

“i wish you wouldn’t squeeze so.” said the dormouse, who was sitting
next to her. “i can hardly breathe.”

“i can’t help it,” said alice very meekly: “i’m growing.”

“you’ve no right to grow _here_,” said the dormouse.

“don’t talk nonsense,” said alice more boldly: “you know you’re growing
too.”

“yes, but _i_ grow at a reasonable pace,” said the dormouse: “not in
that ridiculous fashion.” and he got up very sulkily and crossed over
to the other side of the court.

all this time the queen had never left off staring at the hatter, and,
just as the dormouse crossed the court, she said to one of the officers
of the court, “bring me the list of the singers in the last concert!”
on which the wretched hatter trembled so, that he shook both his shoes
off.

“give your evidence,” the king repeated angrily, “or i’ll have you
executed, whether you’re nervous or not.”

“i’m a poor man, your majesty,” the hatter began, in a trembling voice,
“—and i hadn’t begun my tea—not above a week or so—and what with the
bread-and-butter getting so thin—and the twinkling of the tea—”

“the twinkling of the _what?_” said the king.

“it _began_ with the tea,” the hatter replied.

“of course twinkling begins with a t!” said the king sharply. “do you
take me for a dunce? go on!”

“i’m a poor man,” the hatter went on, “and most things twinkled after
that—only the march hare said—”

“i didn’t!” the march hare interrupted in a great hurry.

“you did!” said the hatter.

“i deny it!” said the march hare.

“he denies it,” said the king: “leave out that part.”

“well, at any rate, the dormouse said—” the hatter went on, looking
anxiously round to see if he would deny it too: but the dormouse denied
nothing, being fast asleep.

“after that,” continued the hatter, “i cut some more bread-and-butter—”

“but what did the dormouse say?” one of the jury asked.

“that i can’t remember,” said the hatter.

“you _must_ remember,” remarked the king, “or i’ll have you executed.”

the miserable hatter dropped his teacup and bread-and-butter, and went
down on one knee. “i’m a poor man, your majesty,” he began.

“you’re a _very_ poor _speaker_,” said the king.

here one of the guinea-pigs cheered, and was immediately suppressed by
the officers of the court. (as that is rather a hard word, i will just
explain to you how it was done. they had a large canvas bag, which tied
up at the mouth with strings: into this they slipped the guinea-pig,
head first, and then sat upon it.)

“i’m glad i’ve seen that done,” thought alice. “i’ve so often read in
the newspapers, at the end of trials, “there was some attempts at
applause, which was immediately suppressed by the officers of the
court,” and i never understood what it meant till now.”

“if that’s all you know about it, you may stand down,” continued the
king.

“i can’t go no lower,” said the hatter: “i’m on the floor, as it is.”

“then you may _sit_ down,” the king replied.

here the other guinea-pig cheered, and was suppressed.

“come, that finished the guinea-pigs!” thought alice. “now we shall get
on better.”

“i’d rather finish my tea,” said the hatter, with an anxious look at
the queen, who was reading the list of singers.

“you may go,” said the king, and the hatter hurriedly left the court,
without even waiting to put his shoes on.

“—and just take his head off outside,” the queen added to one of the
officers: but the hatter was out of sight before the officer could get
to the door.

“call the next witness!” said the king.

the next witness was the duchess’s cook. she carried the pepper-box in
her hand, and alice guessed who it was, even before she got into the
court, by the way the people near the door began sneezing all at once.

“give your evidence,” said the king.

“shan’t,” said the cook.

the king looked anxiously at the white rabbit, who said in a low voice,
“your majesty must cross-examine _this_ witness.”

“well, if i must, i must,” the king said, with a melancholy air, and,
after folding his arms and frowning at the cook till his eyes were
nearly out of sight, he said in a deep voice, “what are tarts made of?”

“pepper, mostly,” said the cook.

“treacle,” said a sleepy voice behind her.

“collar that dormouse,” the queen shrieked out. “behead that dormouse!
turn that dormouse out of court! suppress him! pinch him! off with his
whiskers!”

for some minutes the whole court was in confusion, getting the dormouse
turned out, and, by the time they had settled down again, the cook had
disappeared.

“never mind!” said the king, with an air of great relief. “call the
next witness.” and he added in an undertone to the queen, “really, my
dear, _you_ must cross-examine the next witness. it quite makes my
forehead ache!”

alice watched the white rabbit as he fumbled over the list, feeling
very curious to see what the next witness would be like, “—for they
haven’t got much evidence _yet_,” she said to herself. imagine her
surprise, when the white rabbit read out, at the top of his shrill
little voice, the name “alice!”




chapter xii.
alice’s evidence


“here!” cried alice, quite forgetting in the flurry of the moment how
large she had grown in the last few minutes, and she jumped up in such
a hurry that she tipped over the jury-box with the edge of her skirt,
upsetting all the jurymen on to the heads of the crowd below, and there
they lay sprawling about, reminding her very much of a globe of
goldfish she had accidentally upset the week before.

“oh, i _beg_ your pardon!” she exclaimed in a tone of great dismay, and
began picking them up again as quickly as she could, for the accident
of the goldfish kept running in her head, and she had a vague sort of
idea that they must be collected at once and put back into the
jury-box, or they would die.

“the trial cannot proceed,” said the king in a very grave voice, “until
all the jurymen are back in their proper places—_all_,” he repeated
with great emphasis, looking hard at alice as he said so.

alice looked at the jury-box, and saw that, in her haste, she had put
the lizard in head downwards, and the poor little thing was waving its
tail about in a melancholy way, being quite unable to move. she soon
got it out again, and put it right; “not that it signifies much,” she
said to herself; “i should think it would be _quite_ as much use in the
trial one way up as the other.”

as soon as the jury had a little recovered from the shock of being
upset, and their slates and pencils had been found and handed back to
them, they set to work very diligently to write out a history of the
accident, all except the lizard, who seemed too much overcome to do
anything but sit with its mouth open, gazing up into the roof of the
court.

“what do you know about this business?” the king said to alice.

“nothing,” said alice.

“nothing _whatever?_” persisted the king.

“nothing whatever,” said alice.

“that’s very important,” the king said, turning to the jury. they were
just beginning to write this down on their slates, when the white
rabbit interrupted: “_un_important, your majesty means, of course,” he
said in a very respectful tone, but frowning and making faces at him as
he spoke.

“_un_important, of course, i meant,” the king hastily said, and went on
to himself in an undertone,

“important—unimportant—unimportant—important—” as if he were trying
which word sounded best.

some of the jury wrote it down “important,” and some “unimportant.”
alice could see this, as she was near enough to look over their slates;
“but it doesn’t matter a bit,” she thought to herself.

at this moment the king, who had been for some time busily writing in
his note-book, cackled out “silence!” and read out from his book, “rule
forty-two. _all persons more than a mile high to leave the court_.”

everybody looked at alice.

“_i’m_ not a mile high,” said alice.

“you are,” said the king.

“nearly two miles high,” added the queen.

“well, i shan’t go, at any rate,” said alice: “besides, that’s not a
regular rule: you invented it just now.”

“it’s the oldest rule in the book,” said the king.

“then it ought to be number one,” said alice.

the king turned pale, and shut his note-book hastily. “consider your
verdict,” he said to the jury, in a low, trembling voice.

“there’s more evidence to come yet, please your majesty,” said the
white rabbit, jumping up in a great hurry; “this paper has just been
picked up.”

“what’s in it?” said the queen.

“i haven’t opened it yet,” said the white rabbit, “but it seems to be a
letter, written by the prisoner to—to somebody.”

“it must have been that,” said the king, “unless it was written to
nobody, which isn’t usual, you know.”

“who is it directed to?” said one of the jurymen.

“it isn’t directed at all,” said the white rabbit; “in fact, there’s
nothing written on the _outside_.” he unfolded the paper as he spoke,
and added “it isn’t a letter, after all: it’s a set of verses.”

“are they in the prisoner’s handwriting?” asked another of the jurymen.

“no, they’re not,” said the white rabbit, “and that’s the queerest
thing about it.” (the jury all looked puzzled.)

“he must have imitated somebody else’s hand,” said the king. (the jury
all brightened up again.)

“please your majesty,” said the knave, “i didn’t write it, and they
can’t prove i did: there’s no name signed at the end.”

“if you didn’t sign it,” said the king, “that only makes the matter
worse. you _must_ have meant some mischief, or else you’d have signed
your name like an honest man.”

there was a general clapping of hands at this: it was the first really
clever thing the king had said that day.

“that _proves_ his guilt,” said the queen.

“it proves nothing of the sort!” said alice. “why, you don’t even know
what they’re about!”

“read them,” said the king.

the white rabbit put on his spectacles. “where shall i begin, please
your majesty?” he asked.

“begin at the beginning,” the king said gravely, “and go on till you
come to the end: then stop.”

these were the verses the white rabbit read:—

“they told me you had been to her,
    and mentioned me to him:
she gave me a good character,
    but said i could not swim.

he sent them word i had not gone
    (we know it to be true):
if she should push the matter on,
    what would become of you?

i gave her one, they gave him two,
    you gave us three or more;
they all returned from him to you,
    though they were mine before.

if i or she should chance to be
    involved in this affair,
he trusts to you to set them free,
    exactly as we were.

my notion was that you had been
    (before she had this fit)
an obstacle that came between
    him, and ourselves, and it.

don’t let him know she liked them best,
    for this must ever be
a secret, kept from all the rest,
    between yourself and me.”


“that’s the most important piece of evidence we’ve heard yet,” said the
king, rubbing his hands; “so now let the jury—”

“if any one of them can explain it,” said alice, (she had grown so
large in the last few minutes that she wasn’t a bit afraid of
interrupting him,) “i’ll give him sixpence. _i_ don’t believe there’s
an atom of meaning in it.”

the jury all wrote down on their slates, “_she_ doesn’t believe there’s
an atom of meaning in it,” but none of them attempted to explain the
paper.

“if there’s no meaning in it,” said the king, “that saves a world of
trouble, you know, as we needn’t try to find any. and yet i don’t
know,” he went on, spreading out the verses on his knee, and looking at
them with one eye; “i seem to see some meaning in them, after all.
“—_said i could not swim_—” you can’t swim, can you?” he added, turning
to the knave.

the knave shook his head sadly. “do i look like it?” he said. (which he
certainly did _not_, being made entirely of cardboard.)

“all right, so far,” said the king, and he went on muttering over the
verses to himself: “‘_we know it to be true_—’ that’s the jury, of
course—‘_i gave her one, they gave him two_—’ why, that must be what he
did with the tarts, you know—”

“but, it goes on ‘_they all returned from him to you_,’” said alice.

“why, there they are!” said the king triumphantly, pointing to the
tarts on the table. “nothing can be clearer than _that_. then
again—‘_before she had this fit_—’ you never had fits, my dear, i
think?” he said to the queen.

“never!” said the queen furiously, throwing an inkstand at the lizard
as she spoke. (the unfortunate little bill had left off writing on his
slate with one finger, as he found it made no mark; but he now hastily
began again, using the ink, that was trickling down his face, as long
as it lasted.)

“then the words don’t _fit_ you,” said the king, looking round the
court with a smile. there was a dead silence.

“it’s a pun!” the king added in an offended tone, and everybody
laughed, “let the jury consider their verdict,” the king said, for
about the twentieth time that day.

“no, no!” said the queen. “sentence first—verdict afterwards.”

“stuff and nonsense!” said alice loudly. “the idea of having the
sentence first!”

“hold your tongue!” said the queen, turning purple.

“i won’t!” said alice.

“off with her head!” the queen shouted at the top of her voice. nobody
moved.

“who cares for you?” said alice, (she had grown to her full size by
this time.) “you’re nothing but a pack of cards!”

at this the whole pack rose up into the air, and came flying down upon
her: she gave a little scream, half of fright and half of anger, and
tried to beat them off, and found herself lying on the bank, with her
head in the lap of her sister, who was gently brushing away some dead
leaves that had fluttered down from the trees upon her face.

“wake up, alice dear!” said her sister; “why, what a long sleep you’ve
had!”

“oh, i’ve had such a curious dream!” said alice, and she told her
sister, as well as she could remember them, all these strange
adventures of hers that you have just been reading about; and when she
had finished, her sister kissed her, and said, “it _was_ a curious
dream, dear, certainly: but now run in to your tea; it’s getting late.”
so alice got up and ran off, thinking while she ran, as well she might,
what a wonderful dream it had been.


but her sister sat still just as she left her, leaning her head on her
hand, watching the setting sun, and thinking of little alice and all
her wonderful adventures, till she too began dreaming after a fashion,
and this was her dream:—

first, she dreamed of little alice herself, and once again the tiny
hands were clasped upon her knee, and the bright eager eyes were
looking up into hers—she could hear the very tones of her voice, and
see that queer little toss of her head to keep back the wandering hair
that _would_ always get into her eyes—and still as she listened, or
seemed to listen, the whole place around her became alive with the
strange creatures of her little sister’s dream.

the long grass rustled at her feet as the white rabbit hurried by—the
frightened mouse splashed his way through the neighbouring pool—she
could hear the rattle of the teacups as the march hare and his friends
shared their never-ending meal, and the shrill voice of the queen
ordering off her unfortunate guests to execution—once more the pig-baby
was sneezing on the duchess’s knee, while plates and dishes crashed
around it—once more the shriek of the gryphon, the squeaking of the
lizard’s slate-pencil, and the choking of the suppressed guinea-pigs,
filled the air, mixed up with the distant sobs of the miserable mock
turtle.

so she sat on, with closed eyes, and half believed herself in
wonderland, though she knew she had but to open them again, and all
would change to dull reality—the grass would be only rustling in the
wind, and the pool rippling to the waving of the reeds—the rattling
teacups would change to tinkling sheep-bells, and the queen’s shrill
cries to the voice of the shepherd boy—and the sneeze of the baby, the
shriek of the gryphon, and all the other queer noises, would change
(she knew) to the confused clamour of the busy farm-yard—while the
lowing of the cattle in the distance would take the place of the mock
turtle’s heavy sobs.

lastly, she pictured to herself how this same little sister of hers
would, in the after-time, be herself a grown woman; and how she would
keep, through all her riper years, the simple and loving heart of her
childhood: and how she would gather about her other little children,
and make _their_ eyes bright and eager with many a strange tale,
perhaps even with the dream of wonderland of long ago: and how she
would feel with all their simple sorrows, and find a pleasure in all
their simple joys, remembering her own child-life, and the happy summer
days.

the end



chapter i


1801—i have just returned from a visit to my landlord—the solitary
neighbour that i shall be troubled with. this is certainly a beautiful
country! in all england, i do not believe that i could have fixed on a
situation so completely removed from the stir of society. a perfect
misanthropist’s heaven—and mr. heathcliff and i are such a suitable
pair to divide the desolation between us. a capital fellow! he little
imagined how my heart warmed towards him when i beheld his black eyes
withdraw so suspiciously under their brows, as i rode up, and when his
fingers sheltered themselves, with a jealous resolution, still further
in his waistcoat, as i announced my name.

“mr. heathcliff?” i said.

a nod was the answer.

“mr. lockwood, your new tenant, sir. i do myself the honour of calling
as soon as possible after my arrival, to express the hope that i have
not inconvenienced you by my perseverance in soliciting the occupation
of thrushcross grange: i heard yesterday you had had some thoughts—”

“thrushcross grange is my own, sir,” he interrupted, wincing. “i should
not allow any one to inconvenience me, if i could hinder it—walk in!”

the “walk in” was uttered with closed teeth, and expressed the
sentiment, “go to the deuce!” even the gate over which he leant
manifested no sympathising movement to the words; and i think that
circumstance determined me to accept the invitation: i felt interested
in a man who seemed more exaggeratedly reserved than myself.

when he saw my horse’s breast fairly pushing the barrier, he did put
out his hand to unchain it, and then sullenly preceded me up the
causeway, calling, as we entered the court,—“joseph, take mr.
lockwood’s horse; and bring up some wine.”

“here we have the whole establishment of domestics, i suppose,” was the
reflection suggested by this compound order. “no wonder the grass grows
up between the flags, and cattle are the only hedge-cutters.”

joseph was an elderly, nay, an old man, very old, perhaps, though hale
and sinewy. “the lord help us!” he soliloquised in an undertone of
peevish displeasure, while relieving me of my horse: looking, meantime,
in my face so sourly that i charitably conjectured he must have need of
divine aid to digest his dinner, and his pious ejaculation had no
reference to my unexpected advent.

wuthering heights is the name of mr. heathcliff’s dwelling. “wuthering”
being a significant provincial adjective, descriptive of the
atmospheric tumult to which its station is exposed in stormy weather.
pure, bracing ventilation they must have up there at all times, indeed:
one may guess the power of the north wind, blowing over the edge, by
the excessive slant of a few stunted firs at the end of the house; and
by a range of gaunt thorns all stretching their limbs one way, as if
craving alms of the sun. happily, the architect had foresight to build
it strong: the narrow windows are deeply set in the wall, and the
corners defended with large jutting stones.

before passing the threshold, i paused to admire a quantity of
grotesque carving lavished over the front, and especially about the
principal door; above which, among a wilderness of crumbling griffins
and shameless little boys, i detected the date “1500,” and the name
“hareton earnshaw.” i would have made a few comments, and requested a
short history of the place from the surly owner; but his attitude at
the door appeared to demand my speedy entrance, or complete departure,
and i had no desire to aggravate his impatience previous to inspecting
the penetralium.

one step brought us into the family sitting-room, without any
introductory lobby or passage: they call it here “the house”
pre-eminently. it includes kitchen and parlour, generally; but i
believe at wuthering heights the kitchen is forced to retreat
altogether into another quarter: at least i distinguished a chatter of
tongues, and a clatter of culinary utensils, deep within; and i
observed no signs of roasting, boiling, or baking, about the huge
fireplace; nor any glitter of copper saucepans and tin cullenders on
the walls. one end, indeed, reflected splendidly both light and heat
from ranks of immense pewter dishes, interspersed with silver jugs and
tankards, towering row after row, on a vast oak dresser, to the very
roof. the latter had never been under-drawn: its entire anatomy lay
bare to an inquiring eye, except where a frame of wood laden with
oatcakes and clusters of legs of beef, mutton, and ham, concealed it.
above the chimney were sundry villainous old guns, and a couple of
horse-pistols: and, by way of ornament, three gaudily painted canisters
disposed along its ledge. the floor was of smooth, white stone; the
chairs, high-backed, primitive structures, painted green: one or two
heavy black ones lurking in the shade. in an arch under the dresser
reposed a huge, liver-coloured bitch pointer, surrounded by a swarm of
squealing puppies; and other dogs haunted other recesses.

the apartment and furniture would have been nothing extraordinary as
belonging to a homely, northern farmer, with a stubborn countenance,
and stalwart limbs set out to advantage in knee-breeches and gaiters.
such an individual seated in his arm-chair, his mug of ale frothing on
the round table before him, is to be seen in any circuit of five or six
miles among these hills, if you go at the right time after dinner. but
mr. heathcliff forms a singular contrast to his abode and style of
living. he is a dark-skinned gipsy in aspect, in dress and manners a
gentleman: that is, as much a gentleman as many a country squire:
rather slovenly, perhaps, yet not looking amiss with his negligence,
because he has an erect and handsome figure; and rather morose.
possibly, some people might suspect him of a degree of under-bred
pride; i have a sympathetic chord within that tells me it is nothing of
the sort: i know, by instinct, his reserve springs from an aversion to
showy displays of feeling—to manifestations of mutual kindliness. he’ll
love and hate equally under cover, and esteem it a species of
impertinence to be loved or hated again. no, i’m running on too fast: i
bestow my own attributes over-liberally on him. mr. heathcliff may have
entirely dissimilar reasons for keeping his hand out of the way when he
meets a would-be acquaintance, to those which actuate me. let me hope
my constitution is almost peculiar: my dear mother used to say i should
never have a comfortable home; and only last summer i proved myself
perfectly unworthy of one.

while enjoying a month of fine weather at the sea-coast, i was thrown
into the company of a most fascinating creature: a real goddess in my
eyes, as long as she took no notice of me. i “never told my love”
vocally; still, if looks have language, the merest idiot might have
guessed i was over head and ears: she understood me at last, and looked
a return—the sweetest of all imaginable looks. and what did i do? i
confess it with shame—shrunk icily into myself, like a snail; at every
glance retired colder and farther; till finally the poor innocent was
led to doubt her own senses, and, overwhelmed with confusion at her
supposed mistake, persuaded her mamma to decamp.

by this curious turn of disposition i have gained the reputation of
deliberate heartlessness; how undeserved, i alone can appreciate.

i took a seat at the end of the hearthstone opposite that towards which
my landlord advanced, and filled up an interval of silence by
attempting to caress the canine mother, who had left her nursery, and
was sneaking wolfishly to the back of my legs, her lip curled up, and
her white teeth watering for a snatch. my caress provoked a long,
guttural gnarl.

“you’d better let the dog alone,” growled mr. heathcliff in unison,
checking fiercer demonstrations with a punch of his foot. “she’s not
accustomed to be spoiled—not kept for a pet.” then, striding to a side
door, he shouted again, “joseph!”

joseph mumbled indistinctly in the depths of the cellar, but gave no
intimation of ascending; so his master dived down to him, leaving me
_vis-à-vis_ the ruffianly bitch and a pair of grim shaggy sheep-dogs,
who shared with her a jealous guardianship over all my movements. not
anxious to come in contact with their fangs, i sat still; but,
imagining they would scarcely understand tacit insults, i unfortunately
indulged in winking and making faces at the trio, and some turn of my
physiognomy so irritated madam, that she suddenly broke into a fury and
leapt on my knees. i flung her back, and hastened to interpose the
table between us. this proceeding aroused the whole hive: half-a-dozen
four-footed fiends, of various sizes and ages, issued from hidden dens
to the common centre. i felt my heels and coat-laps peculiar subjects
of assault; and parrying off the larger combatants as effectually as i
could with the poker, i was constrained to demand, aloud, assistance
from some of the household in re-establishing peace.

mr. heathcliff and his man climbed the cellar steps with vexatious
phlegm: i don’t think they moved one second faster than usual, though
the hearth was an absolute tempest of worrying and yelping. happily, an
inhabitant of the kitchen made more dispatch; a lusty dame, with
tucked-up gown, bare arms, and fire-flushed cheeks, rushed into the
midst of us flourishing a frying-pan: and used that weapon, and her
tongue, to such purpose, that the storm subsided magically, and she
only remained, heaving like a sea after a high wind, when her master
entered on the scene.

“what the devil is the matter?” he asked, eyeing me in a manner that i
could ill endure after this inhospitable treatment.

“what the devil, indeed!” i muttered. “the herd of possessed swine
could have had no worse spirits in them than those animals of yours,
sir. you might as well leave a stranger with a brood of tigers!”

“they won’t meddle with persons who touch nothing,” he remarked,
putting the bottle before me, and restoring the displaced table. “the
dogs do right to be vigilant. take a glass of wine?”

“no, thank you.”

“not bitten, are you?”

“if i had been, i would have set my signet on the biter.” heathcliff’s
countenance relaxed into a grin.

“come, come,” he said, “you are flurried, mr. lockwood. here, take a
little wine. guests are so exceedingly rare in this house that i and my
dogs, i am willing to own, hardly know how to receive them. your
health, sir?”

i bowed and returned the pledge; beginning to perceive that it would be
foolish to sit sulking for the misbehaviour of a pack of curs; besides,
i felt loth to yield the fellow further amusement at my expense; since
his humour took that turn. he—probably swayed by prudential
consideration of the folly of offending a good tenant—relaxed a little
in the laconic style of chipping off his pronouns and auxiliary verbs,
and introduced what he supposed would be a subject of interest to me,—a
discourse on the advantages and disadvantages of my present place of
retirement. i found him very intelligent on the topics we touched; and
before i went home, i was encouraged so far as to volunteer another
visit to-morrow. he evidently wished no repetition of my intrusion. i
shall go, notwithstanding. it is astonishing how sociable i feel myself
compared with him.




chapter ii


yesterday afternoon set in misty and cold. i had half a mind to spend
it by my study fire, instead of wading through heath and mud to
wuthering heights. on coming up from dinner, however, (n.b.—i dine
between twelve and one o’clock; the housekeeper, a matronly lady, taken
as a fixture along with the house, could not, or would not, comprehend
my request that i might be served at five)—on mounting the stairs with
this lazy intention, and stepping into the room, i saw a servant-girl
on her knees surrounded by brushes and coal-scuttles, and raising an
infernal dust as she extinguished the flames with heaps of cinders.
this spectacle drove me back immediately; i took my hat, and, after a
four-miles’ walk, arrived at heathcliff’s garden-gate just in time to
escape the first feathery flakes of a snow shower.

on that bleak hill top the earth was hard with a black frost, and the
air made me shiver through every limb. being unable to remove the
chain, i jumped over, and, running up the flagged causeway bordered
with straggling gooseberry-bushes, knocked vainly for admittance, till
my knuckles tingled and the dogs howled.

“wretched inmates!” i ejaculated, mentally, “you deserve perpetual
isolation from your species for your churlish inhospitality. at least,
i would not keep my doors barred in the day-time. i don’t care—i will
get in!” so resolved, i grasped the latch and shook it vehemently.
vinegar-faced joseph projected his head from a round window of the
barn.

“what are ye for?” he shouted. “t’ maister’s down i’ t’ fowld. go round
by th’ end o’ t’ laith, if ye went to spake to him.”

“is there nobody inside to open the door?” i hallooed, responsively.

“there’s nobbut t’ missis; and shoo’ll not oppen ’t an ye mak’ yer
flaysome dins till neeght.”

“why? cannot you tell her whom i am, eh, joseph?”

“nor-ne me! i’ll hae no hend wi’t,” muttered the head, vanishing.

the snow began to drive thickly. i seized the handle to essay another
trial; when a young man without coat, and shouldering a pitchfork,
appeared in the yard behind. he hailed me to follow him, and, after
marching through a wash-house, and a paved area containing a coal-shed,
pump, and pigeon-cot, we at length arrived in the huge, warm, cheerful
apartment where i was formerly received. it glowed delightfully in the
radiance of an immense fire, compounded of coal, peat, and wood; and
near the table, laid for a plentiful evening meal, i was pleased to
observe the “missis,” an individual whose existence i had never
previously suspected. i bowed and waited, thinking she would bid me
take a seat. she looked at me, leaning back in her chair, and remained
motionless and mute.

“rough weather!” i remarked. “i’m afraid, mrs. heathcliff, the door
must bear the consequence of your servants’ leisure attendance: i had
hard work to make them hear me.”

she never opened her mouth. i stared—she stared also: at any rate, she
kept her eyes on me in a cool, regardless manner, exceedingly
embarrassing and disagreeable.

“sit down,” said the young man, gruffly. “he’ll be in soon.”

i obeyed; and hemmed, and called the villain juno, who deigned, at this
second interview, to move the extreme tip of her tail, in token of
owning my acquaintance.

“a beautiful animal!” i commenced again. “do you intend parting with
the little ones, madam?”

“they are not mine,” said the amiable hostess, more repellingly than
heathcliff himself could have replied.

“ah, your favourites are among these?” i continued, turning to an
obscure cushion full of something like cats.

“a strange choice of favourites!” she observed scornfully.

unluckily, it was a heap of dead rabbits. i hemmed once more, and drew
closer to the hearth, repeating my comment on the wildness of the
evening.

“you should not have come out,” she said, rising and reaching from the
chimney-piece two of the painted canisters.

her position before was sheltered from the light; now, i had a distinct
view of her whole figure and countenance. she was slender, and
apparently scarcely past girlhood: an admirable form, and the most
exquisite little face that i have ever had the pleasure of beholding;
small features, very fair; flaxen ringlets, or rather golden, hanging
loose on her delicate neck; and eyes, had they been agreeable in
expression, that would have been irresistible: fortunately for my
susceptible heart, the only sentiment they evinced hovered between
scorn and a kind of desperation, singularly unnatural to be detected
there. the canisters were almost out of her reach; i made a motion to
aid her; she turned upon me as a miser might turn if any one attempted
to assist him in counting his gold.

“i don’t want your help,” she snapped; “i can get them for myself.”

“i beg your pardon!” i hastened to reply.

“were you asked to tea?” she demanded, tying an apron over her neat
black frock, and standing with a spoonful of the leaf poised over the
pot.

“i shall be glad to have a cup,” i answered.

“were you asked?” she repeated.

“no,” i said, half smiling. “you are the proper person to ask me.”

she flung the tea back, spoon and all, and resumed her chair in a pet;
her forehead corrugated, and her red under-lip pushed out, like a
child’s ready to cry.

meanwhile, the young man had slung on to his person a decidedly shabby
upper garment, and, erecting himself before the blaze, looked down on
me from the corner of his eyes, for all the world as if there were some
mortal feud unavenged between us. i began to doubt whether he were a
servant or not: his dress and speech were both rude, entirely devoid of
the superiority observable in mr. and mrs. heathcliff; his thick brown
curls were rough and uncultivated, his whiskers encroached bearishly
over his cheeks, and his hands were embrowned like those of a common
labourer: still his bearing was free, almost haughty, and he showed
none of a domestic’s assiduity in attending on the lady of the house.
in the absence of clear proofs of his condition, i deemed it best to
abstain from noticing his curious conduct; and, five minutes
afterwards, the entrance of heathcliff relieved me, in some measure,
from my uncomfortable state.

“you see, sir, i am come, according to promise!” i exclaimed, assuming
the cheerful; “and i fear i shall be weather-bound for half an hour, if
you can afford me shelter during that space.”

“half an hour?” he said, shaking the white flakes from his clothes; “i
wonder you should select the thick of a snow-storm to ramble about in.
do you know that you run a risk of being lost in the marshes? people
familiar with these moors often miss their road on such evenings; and i
can tell you there is no chance of a change at present.”

“perhaps i can get a guide among your lads, and he might stay at the
grange till morning—could you spare me one?”

“no, i could not.”

“oh, indeed! well, then, i must trust to my own sagacity.”

“umph!”

“are you going to mak’ the tea?” demanded he of the shabby coat,
shifting his ferocious gaze from me to the young lady.

“is _he_ to have any?” she asked, appealing to heathcliff.

“get it ready, will you?” was the answer, uttered so savagely that i
started. the tone in which the words were said revealed a genuine bad
nature. i no longer felt inclined to call heathcliff a capital fellow.
when the preparations were finished, he invited me with—“now, sir,
bring forward your chair.” and we all, including the rustic youth, drew
round the table: an austere silence prevailing while we discussed our
meal.

i thought, if i had caused the cloud, it was my duty to make an effort
to dispel it. they could not every day sit so grim and taciturn; and it
was impossible, however ill-tempered they might be, that the universal
scowl they wore was their every-day countenance.

“it is strange,” i began, in the interval of swallowing one cup of tea
and receiving another—“it is strange how custom can mould our tastes
and ideas: many could not imagine the existence of happiness in a life
of such complete exile from the world as you spend, mr. heathcliff;
yet, i’ll venture to say, that, surrounded by your family, and with
your amiable lady as the presiding genius over your home and heart—”

“my amiable lady!” he interrupted, with an almost diabolical sneer on
his face. “where is she—my amiable lady?”

“mrs. heathcliff, your wife, i mean.”

“well, yes—oh, you would intimate that her spirit has taken the post of
ministering angel, and guards the fortunes of wuthering heights, even
when her body is gone. is that it?”

perceiving myself in a blunder, i attempted to correct it. i might have
seen there was too great a disparity between the ages of the parties to
make it likely that they were man and wife. one was about forty: a
period of mental vigour at which men seldom cherish the delusion of
being married for love by girls: that dream is reserved for the solace
of our declining years. the other did not look seventeen.

then it flashed upon me—“the clown at my elbow, who is drinking his tea
out of a basin and eating his bread with unwashed hands, may be her
husband: heathcliff junior, of course. here is the consequence of being
buried alive: she has thrown herself away upon that boor from sheer
ignorance that better individuals existed! a sad pity—i must beware how
i cause her to regret her choice.” the last reflection may seem
conceited; it was not. my neighbour struck me as bordering on
repulsive; i knew, through experience, that i was tolerably attractive.

“mrs. heathcliff is my daughter-in-law,” said heathcliff, corroborating
my surmise. he turned, as he spoke, a peculiar look in her direction: a
look of hatred; unless he has a most perverse set of facial muscles
that will not, like those of other people, interpret the language of
his soul.

“ah, certainly—i see now: you are the favoured possessor of the
beneficent fairy,” i remarked, turning to my neighbour.

this was worse than before: the youth grew crimson, and clenched his
fist, with every appearance of a meditated assault. but he seemed to
recollect himself presently, and smothered the storm in a brutal curse,
muttered on my behalf: which, however, i took care not to notice.

“unhappy in your conjectures, sir,” observed my host; “we neither of us
have the privilege of owning your good fairy; her mate is dead. i said
she was my daughter-in-law: therefore, she must have married my son.”

“and this young man is—”

“not my son, assuredly.”

heathcliff smiled again, as if it were rather too bold a jest to
attribute the paternity of that bear to him.

“my name is hareton earnshaw,” growled the other; “and i’d counsel you
to respect it!”

“i’ve shown no disrespect,” was my reply, laughing internally at the
dignity with which he announced himself.

he fixed his eye on me longer than i cared to return the stare, for
fear i might be tempted either to box his ears or render my hilarity
audible. i began to feel unmistakably out of place in that pleasant
family circle. the dismal spiritual atmosphere overcame, and more than
neutralised, the glowing physical comforts round me; and i resolved to
be cautious how i ventured under those rafters a third time.

the business of eating being concluded, and no one uttering a word of
sociable conversation, i approached a window to examine the weather. a
sorrowful sight i saw: dark night coming down prematurely, and sky and
hills mingled in one bitter whirl of wind and suffocating snow.

“i don’t think it possible for me to get home now without a guide,” i
could not help exclaiming. “the roads will be buried already; and, if
they were bare, i could scarcely distinguish a foot in advance.”

“hareton, drive those dozen sheep into the barn porch. they’ll be
covered if left in the fold all night: and put a plank before them,”
said heathcliff.

“how must i do?” i continued, with rising irritation.

there was no reply to my question; and on looking round i saw only
joseph bringing in a pail of porridge for the dogs, and mrs. heathcliff
leaning over the fire, diverting herself with burning a bundle of
matches which had fallen from the chimney-piece as she restored the
tea-canister to its place. the former, when he had deposited his
burden, took a critical survey of the room, and in cracked tones grated
out—“aw wonder how yah can faishion to stand thear i’ idleness un war,
when all on ’ems goan out! bud yah’re a nowt, and it’s no use
talking—yah’ll niver mend o’yer ill ways, but goa raight to t’ divil,
like yer mother afore ye!”

i imagined, for a moment, that this piece of eloquence was addressed to
me; and, sufficiently enraged, stepped towards the aged rascal with an
intention of kicking him out of the door. mrs. heathcliff, however,
checked me by her answer.

“you scandalous old hypocrite!” she replied. “are you not afraid of
being carried away bodily, whenever you mention the devil’s name? i
warn you to refrain from provoking me, or i’ll ask your abduction as a
special favour! stop! look here, joseph,” she continued, taking a long,
dark book from a shelf; “i’ll show you how far i’ve progressed in the
black art: i shall soon be competent to make a clear house of it. the
red cow didn’t die by chance; and your rheumatism can hardly be
reckoned among providential visitations!”

“oh, wicked, wicked!” gasped the elder; “may the lord deliver us from
evil!”

“no, reprobate! you are a castaway—be off, or i’ll hurt you seriously!
i’ll have you all modelled in wax and clay! and the first who passes
the limits i fix shall—i’ll not say what he shall be done to—but,
you’ll see! go, i’m looking at you!”

the little witch put a mock malignity into her beautiful eyes, and
joseph, trembling with sincere horror, hurried out, praying, and
ejaculating “wicked” as he went. i thought her conduct must be prompted
by a species of dreary fun; and, now that we were alone, i endeavoured
to interest her in my distress.

“mrs. heathcliff,” i said earnestly, “you must excuse me for troubling
you. i presume, because, with that face, i’m sure you cannot help being
good-hearted. do point out some landmarks by which i may know my way
home: i have no more idea how to get there than you would have how to
get to london!”

“take the road you came,” she answered, ensconcing herself in a chair,
with a candle, and the long book open before her. “it is brief advice,
but as sound as i can give.”

“then, if you hear of me being discovered dead in a bog or a pit full
of snow, your conscience won’t whisper that it is partly your fault?”

“how so? i cannot escort you. they wouldn’t let me go to the end of the
garden wall.”

“_you_! i should be sorry to ask you to cross the threshold, for my
convenience, on such a night,” i cried. “i want you to _tell_ me my
way, not to _show_ it: or else to persuade mr. heathcliff to give me a
guide.”

“who? there is himself, earnshaw, zillah, joseph and i. which would you
have?”

“are there no boys at the farm?”

“no; those are all.”

“then, it follows that i am compelled to stay.”

“that you may settle with your host. i have nothing to do with it.”

“i hope it will be a lesson to you to make no more rash journeys on
these hills,” cried heathcliff’s stern voice from the kitchen entrance.
“as to staying here, i don’t keep accommodations for visitors: you must
share a bed with hareton or joseph, if you do.”

“i can sleep on a chair in this room,” i replied.

“no, no! a stranger is a stranger, be he rich or poor: it will not suit
me to permit any one the range of the place while i am off guard!” said
the unmannerly wretch.

with this insult my patience was at an end. i uttered an expression of
disgust, and pushed past him into the yard, running against earnshaw in
my haste. it was so dark that i could not see the means of exit; and,
as i wandered round, i heard another specimen of their civil behaviour
amongst each other. at first the young man appeared about to befriend
me.

“i’ll go with him as far as the park,” he said.

“you’ll go with him to hell!” exclaimed his master, or whatever
relation he bore. “and who is to look after the horses, eh?”

“a man’s life is of more consequence than one evening’s neglect of the
horses: somebody must go,” murmured mrs. heathcliff, more kindly than i
expected.

“not at your command!” retorted hareton. “if you set store on him,
you’d better be quiet.”

“then i hope his ghost will haunt you; and i hope mr. heathcliff will
never get another tenant till the grange is a ruin,” she answered,
sharply.

“hearken, hearken, shoo’s cursing on ’em!” muttered joseph, towards
whom i had been steering.

he sat within earshot, milking the cows by the light of a lantern,
which i seized unceremoniously, and, calling out that i would send it
back on the morrow, rushed to the nearest postern.

“maister, maister, he’s staling t’ lanthern!” shouted the ancient,
pursuing my retreat. “hey, gnasher! hey, dog! hey wolf, holld him,
holld him!”

on opening the little door, two hairy monsters flew at my throat,
bearing me down, and extinguishing the light; while a mingled guffaw
from heathcliff and hareton put the copestone on my rage and
humiliation. fortunately, the beasts seemed more bent on stretching
their paws, and yawning, and flourishing their tails, than devouring me
alive; but they would suffer no resurrection, and i was forced to lie
till their malignant masters pleased to deliver me: then, hatless and
trembling with wrath, i ordered the miscreants to let me out—on their
peril to keep me one minute longer—with several incoherent threats of
retaliation that, in their indefinite depth of virulency, smacked of
king lear.

the vehemence of my agitation brought on a copious bleeding at the
nose, and still heathcliff laughed, and still i scolded. i don’t know
what would have concluded the scene, had there not been one person at
hand rather more rational than myself, and more benevolent than my
entertainer. this was zillah, the stout housewife; who at length issued
forth to inquire into the nature of the uproar. she thought that some
of them had been laying violent hands on me; and, not daring to attack
her master, she turned her vocal artillery against the younger
scoundrel.

“well, mr. earnshaw,” she cried, “i wonder what you’ll have agait next?
are we going to murder folk on our very door-stones? i see this house
will never do for me—look at t’ poor lad, he’s fair choking! wisht,
wisht; you mun’n’t go on so. come in, and i’ll cure that: there now,
hold ye still.”

with these words she suddenly splashed a pint of icy water down my
neck, and pulled me into the kitchen. mr. heathcliff followed, his
accidental merriment expiring quickly in his habitual moroseness.

i was sick exceedingly, and dizzy, and faint; and thus compelled
perforce to accept lodgings under his roof. he told zillah to give me a
glass of brandy, and then passed on to the inner room; while she
condoled with me on my sorry predicament, and having obeyed his orders,
whereby i was somewhat revived, ushered me to bed.




chapter iii


while leading the way upstairs, she recommended that i should hide the
candle, and not make a noise; for her master had an odd notion about
the chamber she would put me in, and never let anybody lodge there
willingly. i asked the reason. she did not know, she answered: she had
only lived there a year or two; and they had so many queer goings on,
she could not begin to be curious.

too stupefied to be curious myself, i fastened my door and glanced
round for the bed. the whole furniture consisted of a chair, a
clothes-press, and a large oak case, with squares cut out near the top
resembling coach windows. having approached this structure, i looked
inside, and perceived it to be a singular sort of old-fashioned couch,
very conveniently designed to obviate the necessity for every member of
the family having a room to himself. in fact, it formed a little
closet, and the ledge of a window, which it enclosed, served as a
table.

i slid back the panelled sides, got in with my light, pulled them
together again, and felt secure against the vigilance of heathcliff,
and every one else.

the ledge, where i placed my candle, had a few mildewed books piled up
in one corner; and it was covered with writing scratched on the paint.
this writing, however, was nothing but a name repeated in all kinds of
characters, large and small—_catherine earnshaw_, here and there varied
to _catherine heathcliff_, and then again to _catherine linton_.

in vapid listlessness i leant my head against the window, and continued
spelling over catherine earnshaw—heathcliff—linton, till my eyes
closed; but they had not rested five minutes when a glare of white
letters started from the dark, as vivid as spectres—the air swarmed
with catherines; and rousing myself to dispel the obtrusive name, i
discovered my candle-wick reclining on one of the antique volumes, and
perfuming the place with an odour of roasted calf-skin.

i snuffed it off, and, very ill at ease under the influence of cold and
lingering nausea, sat up and spread open the injured tome on my knee.
it was a testament, in lean type, and smelling dreadfully musty: a
fly-leaf bore the inscription—“catherine earnshaw, her book,” and a
date some quarter of a century back.

i shut it, and took up another and another, till i had examined all.
catherine’s library was select, and its state of dilapidation proved it
to have been well used, though not altogether for a legitimate purpose:
scarcely one chapter had escaped a pen-and-ink commentary—at least the
appearance of one—covering every morsel of blank that the printer had
left. some were detached sentences; other parts took the form of a
regular diary, scrawled in an unformed, childish hand. at the top of an
extra page (quite a treasure, probably, when first lighted on) i was
greatly amused to behold an excellent caricature of my friend
joseph,—rudely, yet powerfully sketched. an immediate interest kindled
within me for the unknown catherine, and i began forthwith to decipher
her faded hieroglyphics.

“an awful sunday,” commenced the paragraph beneath. “i wish my father
were back again. hindley is a detestable substitute—his conduct to
heathcliff is atrocious—h. and i are going to rebel—we took our
initiatory step this evening.

“all day had been flooding with rain; we could not go to church, so
joseph must needs get up a congregation in the garret; and, while
hindley and his wife basked downstairs before a comfortable fire—doing
anything but reading their bibles, i’ll answer for it—heathcliff,
myself, and the unhappy ploughboy were commanded to take our
prayer-books, and mount: we were ranged in a row, on a sack of corn,
groaning and shivering, and hoping that joseph would shiver too, so
that he might give us a short homily for his own sake. a vain idea! the
service lasted precisely three hours; and yet my brother had the face
to exclaim, when he saw us descending, ‘what, done already?’ on sunday
evenings we used to be permitted to play, if we did not make much
noise; now a mere titter is sufficient to send us into corners.

“‘you forget you have a master here,’ says the tyrant. ‘i’ll demolish
the first who puts me out of temper! i insist on perfect sobriety and
silence. oh, boy! was that you? frances darling, pull his hair as you
go by: i heard him snap his fingers.’ frances pulled his hair heartily,
and then went and seated herself on her husband’s knee, and there they
were, like two babies, kissing and talking nonsense by the hour—foolish
palaver that we should be ashamed of. we made ourselves as snug as our
means allowed in the arch of the dresser. i had just fastened our
pinafores together, and hung them up for a curtain, when in comes
joseph, on an errand from the stables. he tears down my handiwork,
boxes my ears, and croaks:

“‘t’ maister nobbut just buried, and sabbath not o’ered, und t’ sound
o’ t’ gospel still i’ yer lugs, and ye darr be laiking! shame on ye!
sit ye down, ill childer! there’s good books eneugh if ye’ll read ’em:
sit ye down, and think o’ yer sowls!’

“saying this, he compelled us so to square our positions that we might
receive from the far-off fire a dull ray to show us the text of the
lumber he thrust upon us. i could not bear the employment. i took my
dingy volume by the scroop, and hurled it into the dog-kennel, vowing i
hated a good book. heathcliff kicked his to the same place. then there
was a hubbub!

“‘maister hindley!’ shouted our chaplain. ‘maister, coom hither! miss
cathy’s riven th’ back off “th’ helmet o’ salvation,” un’ heathcliff’s
pawsed his fit into t’ first part o’ “t’ brooad way to destruction!”
it’s fair flaysome that ye let ’em go on this gait. ech! th’ owd man
wad ha’ laced ’em properly—but he’s goan!’

“hindley hurried up from his paradise on the hearth, and seizing one of
us by the collar, and the other by the arm, hurled both into the
back-kitchen; where, joseph asseverated, ‘owd nick’ would fetch us as
sure as we were living: and, so comforted, we each sought a separate
nook to await his advent. i reached this book, and a pot of ink from a
shelf, and pushed the house-door ajar to give me light, and i have got
the time on with writing for twenty minutes; but my companion is
impatient, and proposes that we should appropriate the dairywoman’s
cloak, and have a scamper on the moors, under its shelter. a pleasant
suggestion—and then, if the surly old man come in, he may believe his
prophecy verified—we cannot be damper, or colder, in the rain than we
are here.”

* * * * * *


i suppose catherine fulfilled her project, for the next sentence took
up another subject: she waxed lachrymose.

“how little did i dream that hindley would ever make me cry so!” she
wrote. “my head aches, till i cannot keep it on the pillow; and still i
can’t give over. poor heathcliff! hindley calls him a vagabond, and
won’t let him sit with us, nor eat with us any more; and, he says, he
and i must not play together, and threatens to turn him out of the
house if we break his orders. he has been blaming our father (how dared
he?) for treating h. too liberally; and swears he will reduce him to
his right place—”

* * * * * *


i began to nod drowsily over the dim page: my eye wandered from
manuscript to print. i saw a red ornamented title—“seventy times seven,
and the first of the seventy-first. a pious discourse delivered by the
reverend jabez branderham, in the chapel of gimmerden sough.” and while
i was, half-consciously, worrying my brain to guess what jabez
branderham would make of his subject, i sank back in bed, and fell
asleep. alas, for the effects of bad tea and bad temper! what else
could it be that made me pass such a terrible night? i don’t remember
another that i can at all compare with it since i was capable of
suffering.

i began to dream, almost before i ceased to be sensible of my locality.
i thought it was morning; and i had set out on my way home, with joseph
for a guide. the snow lay yards deep in our road; and, as we floundered
on, my companion wearied me with constant reproaches that i had not
brought a pilgrim’s staff: telling me that i could never get into the
house without one, and boastfully flourishing a heavy-headed cudgel,
which i understood to be so denominated. for a moment i considered it
absurd that i should need such a weapon to gain admittance into my own
residence. then a new idea flashed across me. i was not going there: we
were journeying to hear the famous jabez branderham preach, from the
text—“seventy times seven;” and either joseph, the preacher, or i had
committed the “first of the seventy-first,” and were to be publicly
exposed and excommunicated.

we came to the chapel. i have passed it really in my walks, twice or
thrice; it lies in a hollow, between two hills: an elevated hollow,
near a swamp, whose peaty moisture is said to answer all the purposes
of embalming on the few corpses deposited there. the roof has been kept
whole hitherto; but as the clergyman’s stipend is only twenty pounds
per annum, and a house with two rooms, threatening speedily to
determine into one, no clergyman will undertake the duties of pastor:
especially as it is currently reported that his flock would rather let
him starve than increase the living by one penny from their own
pockets. however, in my dream, jabez had a full and attentive
congregation; and he preached—good god! what a sermon; divided into
_four hundred and ninety_ parts, each fully equal to an ordinary
address from the pulpit, and each discussing a separate sin! where he
searched for them, i cannot tell. he had his private manner of
interpreting the phrase, and it seemed necessary the brother should sin
different sins on every occasion. they were of the most curious
character: odd transgressions that i never imagined previously.

oh, how weary i grew. how i writhed, and yawned, and nodded, and
revived! how i pinched and pricked myself, and rubbed my eyes, and
stood up, and sat down again, and nudged joseph to inform me if he
would _ever_ have done. i was condemned to hear all out: finally, he
reached the “_first of the seventy-first_.” at that crisis, a sudden
inspiration descended on me; i was moved to rise and denounce jabez
branderham as the sinner of the sin that no christian need pardon.

“sir,” i exclaimed, “sitting here within these four walls, at one
stretch, i have endured and forgiven the four hundred and ninety heads
of your discourse. seventy times seven times have i plucked up my hat
and been about to depart—seventy times seven times have you
preposterously forced me to resume my seat. the four hundred and
ninety-first is too much. fellow-martyrs, have at him! drag him down,
and crush him to atoms, that the place which knows him may know him no
more!”

“_thou art the man!_” cried jabez, after a solemn pause, leaning over
his cushion. “seventy times seven times didst thou gapingly contort thy
visage—seventy times seven did i take counsel with my soul—lo, this is
human weakness: this also may be absolved! the first of the
seventy-first is come. brethren, execute upon him the judgment written.
such honour have all his saints!”

with that concluding word, the whole assembly, exalting their pilgrim’s
staves, rushed round me in a body; and i, having no weapon to raise in
self-defence, commenced grappling with joseph, my nearest and most
ferocious assailant, for his. in the confluence of the multitude,
several clubs crossed; blows, aimed at me, fell on other sconces.
presently the whole chapel resounded with rappings and counter
rappings: every man’s hand was against his neighbour; and branderham,
unwilling to remain idle, poured forth his zeal in a shower of loud
taps on the boards of the pulpit, which responded so smartly that, at
last, to my unspeakable relief, they woke me. and what was it that had
suggested the tremendous tumult? what had played jabez’s part in the
row? merely the branch of a fir-tree that touched my lattice as the
blast wailed by, and rattled its dry cones against the panes! i
listened doubtingly an instant; detected the disturber, then turned and
dozed, and dreamt again: if possible, still more disagreeably than
before.

this time, i remembered i was lying in the oak closet, and i heard
distinctly the gusty wind, and the driving of the snow; i heard, also,
the fir bough repeat its teasing sound, and ascribed it to the right
cause: but it annoyed me so much, that i resolved to silence it, if
possible; and, i thought, i rose and endeavoured to unhasp the
casement. the hook was soldered into the staple: a circumstance
observed by me when awake, but forgotten. “i must stop it,
nevertheless!” i muttered, knocking my knuckles through the glass, and
stretching an arm out to seize the importunate branch; instead of
which, my fingers closed on the fingers of a little, ice-cold hand!

the intense horror of nightmare came over me: i tried to draw back my
arm, but the hand clung to it, and a most melancholy voice sobbed,

“let me in—let me in!”

“who are you?” i asked, struggling, meanwhile, to disengage myself.

“catherine linton,” it replied, shiveringly (why did i think of
_linton_? i had read _earnshaw_ twenty times for linton)—“i’m come
home: i’d lost my way on the moor!”

as it spoke, i discerned, obscurely, a child’s face looking through the
window. terror made me cruel; and, finding it useless to attempt
shaking the creature off, i pulled its wrist on to the broken pane, and
rubbed it to and fro till the blood ran down and soaked the bedclothes:
still it wailed, “let me in!” and maintained its tenacious gripe,
almost maddening me with fear.

“how can i!” i said at length. “let _me_ go, if you want me to let you
in!”

the fingers relaxed, i snatched mine through the hole, hurriedly piled
the books up in a pyramid against it, and stopped my ears to exclude
the lamentable prayer.

i seemed to keep them closed above a quarter of an hour; yet, the
instant i listened again, there was the doleful cry moaning on!

“begone!” i shouted. “i’ll never let you in, not if you beg for twenty
years.”

“it is twenty years,” mourned the voice: “twenty years. i’ve been a
waif for twenty years!”

thereat began a feeble scratching outside, and the pile of books moved
as if thrust forward.

i tried to jump up; but could not stir a limb; and so yelled aloud, in
a frenzy of fright.

to my confusion, i discovered the yell was not ideal: hasty footsteps
approached my chamber door; somebody pushed it open, with a vigorous
hand, and a light glimmered through the squares at the top of the bed.
i sat shuddering, yet, and wiping the perspiration from my forehead:
the intruder appeared to hesitate, and muttered to himself.

at last, he said, in a half-whisper, plainly not expecting an answer,

“is any one here?”

i considered it best to confess my presence; for i knew heathcliff’s
accents, and feared he might search further, if i kept quiet.

with this intention, i turned and opened the panels. i shall not soon
forget the effect my action produced.

heathcliff stood near the entrance, in his shirt and trousers; with a
candle dripping over his fingers, and his face as white as the wall
behind him. the first creak of the oak startled him like an electric
shock: the light leaped from his hold to a distance of some feet, and
his agitation was so extreme, that he could hardly pick it up.

“it is only your guest, sir,” i called out, desirous to spare him the
humiliation of exposing his cowardice further. “i had the misfortune to
scream in my sleep, owing to a frightful nightmare. i’m sorry i
disturbed you.”

“oh, god confound you, mr. lockwood! i wish you were at the—” commenced
my host, setting the candle on a chair, because he found it impossible
to hold it steady. “and who showed you up into this room?” he
continued, crushing his nails into his palms, and grinding his teeth to
subdue the maxillary convulsions. “who was it? i’ve a good mind to turn
them out of the house this moment!”

“it was your servant zillah,” i replied, flinging myself on to the
floor, and rapidly resuming my garments. “i should not care if you did,
mr. heathcliff; she richly deserves it. i suppose that she wanted to
get another proof that the place was haunted, at my expense. well, it
is—swarming with ghosts and goblins! you have reason in shutting it up,
i assure you. no one will thank you for a doze in such a den!”

“what do you mean?” asked heathcliff, “and what are you doing? lie down
and finish out the night, since you _are_ here; but, for heaven’s sake!
don’t repeat that horrid noise: nothing could excuse it, unless you
were having your throat cut!”

“if the little fiend had got in at the window, she probably would have
strangled me!” i returned. “i’m not going to endure the persecutions of
your hospitable ancestors again. was not the reverend jabez branderham
akin to you on the mother’s side? and that minx, catherine linton, or
earnshaw, or however she was called—she must have been a
changeling—wicked little soul! she told me she had been walking the
earth these twenty years: a just punishment for her mortal
transgressions, i’ve no doubt!”

scarcely were these words uttered when i recollected the association of
heathcliff’s with catherine’s name in the book, which had completely
slipped from my memory, till thus awakened. i blushed at my
inconsideration: but, without showing further consciousness of the
offence, i hastened to add—“the truth is, sir, i passed the first part
of the night in—” here i stopped afresh—i was about to say “perusing
those old volumes,” then it would have revealed my knowledge of their
written, as well as their printed, contents; so, correcting myself, i
went on—“in spelling over the name scratched on that window-ledge. a
monotonous occupation, calculated to set me asleep, like counting, or—”

“what _can_ you mean by talking in this way to _me!_” thundered
heathcliff with savage vehemence. “how—how _dare_ you, under my
roof?—god! he’s mad to speak so!” and he struck his forehead with rage.

i did not know whether to resent this language or pursue my
explanation; but he seemed so powerfully affected that i took pity and
proceeded with my dreams; affirming i had never heard the appellation
of “catherine linton” before, but reading it often over produced an
impression which personified itself when i had no longer my imagination
under control. heathcliff gradually fell back into the shelter of the
bed, as i spoke; finally sitting down almost concealed behind it. i
guessed, however, by his irregular and intercepted breathing, that he
struggled to vanquish an excess of violent emotion. not liking to show
him that i had heard the conflict, i continued my toilette rather
noisily, looked at my watch, and soliloquised on the length of the
night: “not three o’clock yet! i could have taken oath it had been six.
time stagnates here: we must surely have retired to rest at eight!”

“always at nine in winter, and rise at four,” said my host, suppressing
a groan: and, as i fancied, by the motion of his arm’s shadow, dashing
a tear from his eyes. “mr. lockwood,” he added, “you may go into my
room: you’ll only be in the way, coming downstairs so early: and your
childish outcry has sent sleep to the devil for me.”

“and for me, too,” i replied. “i’ll walk in the yard till daylight, and
then i’ll be off; and you need not dread a repetition of my intrusion.
i’m now quite cured of seeking pleasure in society, be it country or
town. a sensible man ought to find sufficient company in himself.”

“delightful company!” muttered heathcliff. “take the candle, and go
where you please. i shall join you directly. keep out of the yard,
though, the dogs are unchained; and the house—juno mounts sentinel
there, and—nay, you can only ramble about the steps and passages. but,
away with you! i’ll come in two minutes!”

i obeyed, so far as to quit the chamber; when, ignorant where the
narrow lobbies led, i stood still, and was witness, involuntarily, to a
piece of superstition on the part of my landlord which belied, oddly,
his apparent sense. he got on to the bed, and wrenched open the
lattice, bursting, as he pulled at it, into an uncontrollable passion
of tears. “come in! come in!” he sobbed. “cathy, do come. oh, do—_once_
more! oh! my heart’s darling! hear me _this_ time, catherine, at last!”
the spectre showed a spectre’s ordinary caprice: it gave no sign of
being; but the snow and wind whirled wildly through, even reaching my
station, and blowing out the light.

there was such anguish in the gush of grief that accompanied this
raving, that my compassion made me overlook its folly, and i drew off,
half angry to have listened at all, and vexed at having related my
ridiculous nightmare, since it produced that agony; though _why_ was
beyond my comprehension. i descended cautiously to the lower regions,
and landed in the back-kitchen, where a gleam of fire, raked compactly
together, enabled me to rekindle my candle. nothing was stirring except
a brindled, grey cat, which crept from the ashes, and saluted me with a
querulous mew.

two benches, shaped in sections of a circle, nearly enclosed the
hearth; on one of these i stretched myself, and grimalkin mounted the
other. we were both of us nodding ere any one invaded our retreat, and
then it was joseph, shuffling down a wooden ladder that vanished in the
roof, through a trap: the ascent to his garret, i suppose. he cast a
sinister look at the little flame which i had enticed to play between
the ribs, swept the cat from its elevation, and bestowing himself in
the vacancy, commenced the operation of stuffing a three-inch pipe with
tobacco. my presence in his sanctum was evidently esteemed a piece of
impudence too shameful for remark: he silently applied the tube to his
lips, folded his arms, and puffed away. i let him enjoy the luxury
unannoyed; and after sucking out his last wreath, and heaving a
profound sigh, he got up, and departed as solemnly as he came.

a more elastic footstep entered next; and now i opened my mouth for a
“good-morning,” but closed it again, the salutation unachieved; for
hareton earnshaw was performing his orison _sotto voce_, in a series of
curses directed against every object he touched, while he rummaged a
corner for a spade or shovel to dig through the drifts. he glanced over
the back of the bench, dilating his nostrils, and thought as little of
exchanging civilities with me as with my companion the cat. i guessed,
by his preparations, that egress was allowed, and, leaving my hard
couch, made a movement to follow him. he noticed this, and thrust at an
inner door with the end of his spade, intimating by an inarticulate
sound that there was the place where i must go, if i changed my
locality.

it opened into the house, where the females were already astir; zillah
urging flakes of flame up the chimney with a colossal bellows; and mrs.
heathcliff, kneeling on the hearth, reading a book by the aid of the
blaze. she held her hand interposed between the furnace-heat and her
eyes, and seemed absorbed in her occupation; desisting from it only to
chide the servant for covering her with sparks, or to push away a dog,
now and then, that snoozled its nose overforwardly into her face. i was
surprised to see heathcliff there also. he stood by the fire, his back
towards me, just finishing a stormy scene with poor zillah; who ever
and anon interrupted her labour to pluck up the corner of her apron,
and heave an indignant groan.

“and you, you worthless—” he broke out as i entered, turning to his
daughter-in-law, and employing an epithet as harmless as duck, or
sheep, but generally represented by a dash—. “there you are, at your
idle tricks again! the rest of them do earn their bread—you live on my
charity! put your trash away, and find something to do. you shall pay
me for the plague of having you eternally in my sight—do you hear,
damnable jade?”

“i’ll put my trash away, because you can make me if i refuse,” answered
the young lady, closing her book, and throwing it on a chair. “but i’ll
not do anything, though you should swear your tongue out, except what i
please!”

heathcliff lifted his hand, and the speaker sprang to a safer distance,
obviously acquainted with its weight. having no desire to be
entertained by a cat-and-dog combat, i stepped forward briskly, as if
eager to partake the warmth of the hearth, and innocent of any
knowledge of the interrupted dispute. each had enough decorum to
suspend further hostilities: heathcliff placed his fists, out of
temptation, in his pockets; mrs. heathcliff curled her lip, and walked
to a seat far off, where she kept her word by playing the part of a
statue during the remainder of my stay. that was not long. i declined
joining their breakfast, and, at the first gleam of dawn, took an
opportunity of escaping into the free air, now clear, and still, and
cold as impalpable ice.

my landlord halloed for me to stop ere i reached the bottom of the
garden, and offered to accompany me across the moor. it was well he
did, for the whole hill-back was one billowy, white ocean; the swells
and falls not indicating corresponding rises and depressions in the
ground: many pits, at least, were filled to a level; and entire ranges
of mounds, the refuse of the quarries, blotted from the chart which my
yesterday’s walk left pictured in my mind. i had remarked on one side
of the road, at intervals of six or seven yards, a line of upright
stones, continued through the whole length of the barren: these were
erected and daubed with lime on purpose to serve as guides in the dark,
and also when a fall, like the present, confounded the deep swamps on
either hand with the firmer path: but, excepting a dirty dot pointing
up here and there, all traces of their existence had vanished: and my
companion found it necessary to warn me frequently to steer to the
right or left, when i imagined i was following, correctly, the windings
of the road.

we exchanged little conversation, and he halted at the entrance of
thrushcross park, saying, i could make no error there. our adieux were
limited to a hasty bow, and then i pushed forward, trusting to my own
resources; for the porter’s lodge is untenanted as yet. the distance
from the gate to the grange is two miles; i believe i managed to make
it four, what with losing myself among the trees, and sinking up to the
neck in snow: a predicament which only those who have experienced it
can appreciate. at any rate, whatever were my wanderings, the clock
chimed twelve as i entered the house; and that gave exactly an hour for
every mile of the usual way from wuthering heights.

my human fixture and her satellites rushed to welcome me; exclaiming,
tumultuously, they had completely given me up: everybody conjectured
that i perished last night; and they were wondering how they must set
about the search for my remains. i bid them be quiet, now that they saw
me returned, and, benumbed to my very heart, i dragged upstairs;
whence, after putting on dry clothes, and pacing to and fro thirty or
forty minutes, to restore the animal heat, i adjourned to my study,
feeble as a kitten: almost too much so to enjoy the cheerful fire and
smoking coffee which the servant had prepared for my refreshment.




chapter iv


what vain weather-cocks we are! i, who had determined to hold myself
independent of all social intercourse, and thanked my stars that, at
length, i had lighted on a spot where it was next to impracticable—i,
weak wretch, after maintaining till dusk a struggle with low spirits
and solitude, was finally compelled to strike my colours; and under
pretence of gaining information concerning the necessities of my
establishment, i desired mrs. dean, when she brought in supper, to sit
down while i ate it; hoping sincerely she would prove a regular gossip,
and either rouse me to animation or lull me to sleep by her talk.

“you have lived here a considerable time,” i commenced; “did you not
say sixteen years?”

“eighteen, sir: i came when the mistress was married, to wait on her;
after she died, the master retained me for his housekeeper.”

“indeed.”

there ensued a pause. she was not a gossip, i feared; unless about her
own affairs, and those could hardly interest me. however, having
studied for an interval, with a fist on either knee, and a cloud of
meditation over her ruddy countenance, she ejaculated—“ah, times are
greatly changed since then!”

“yes,” i remarked, “you’ve seen a good many alterations, i suppose?”

“i have: and troubles too,” she said.

“oh, i’ll turn the talk on my landlord’s family!” i thought to myself.
“a good subject to start! and that pretty girl-widow, i should like to
know her history: whether she be a native of the country, or, as is
more probable, an exotic that the surly _indigenae_ will not recognise
for kin.” with this intention i asked mrs. dean why heathcliff let
thrushcross grange, and preferred living in a situation and residence
so much inferior. “is he not rich enough to keep the estate in good
order?” i inquired.

“rich, sir!” she returned. “he has nobody knows what money, and every
year it increases. yes, yes, he’s rich enough to live in a finer house
than this: but he’s very near—close-handed; and, if he had meant to
flit to thrushcross grange, as soon as he heard of a good tenant he
could not have borne to miss the chance of getting a few hundreds more.
it is strange people should be so greedy, when they are alone in the
world!”

“he had a son, it seems?”

“yes, he had one—he is dead.”

“and that young lady, mrs. heathcliff, is his widow?”

“yes.”

“where did she come from originally?”

“why, sir, she is my late master’s daughter: catherine linton was her
maiden name. i nursed her, poor thing! i did wish mr. heathcliff would
remove here, and then we might have been together again.”

“what! catherine linton?” i exclaimed, astonished. but a minute’s
reflection convinced me it was not my ghostly catherine. “then,” i
continued, “my predecessor’s name was linton?”

“it was.”

“and who is that earnshaw: hareton earnshaw, who lives with mr.
heathcliff? are they relations?”

“no; he is the late mrs. linton’s nephew.”

“the young lady’s cousin, then?”

“yes; and her husband was her cousin also: one on the mother’s, the
other on the father’s side: heathcliff married mr. linton’s sister.”

“i see the house at wuthering heights has ‘earnshaw’ carved over the
front door. are they an old family?”

“very old, sir; and hareton is the last of them, as our miss cathy is
of us—i mean, of the lintons. have you been to wuthering heights? i beg
pardon for asking; but i should like to hear how she is!”

“mrs. heathcliff? she looked very well, and very handsome; yet, i
think, not very happy.”

“oh dear, i don’t wonder! and how did you like the master?”

“a rough fellow, rather, mrs. dean. is not that his character?”

“rough as a saw-edge, and hard as whinstone! the less you meddle with
him the better.”

“he must have had some ups and downs in life to make him such a churl.
do you know anything of his history?”

“it’s a cuckoo’s, sir—i know all about it: except where he was born,
and who were his parents, and how he got his money at first. and
hareton has been cast out like an unfledged dunnock! the unfortunate
lad is the only one in all this parish that does not guess how he has
been cheated.”

“well, mrs. dean, it will be a charitable deed to tell me something of
my neighbours: i feel i shall not rest if i go to bed; so be good
enough to sit and chat an hour.”

“oh, certainly, sir! i’ll just fetch a little sewing, and then i’ll sit
as long as you please. but you’ve caught cold: i saw you shivering, and
you must have some gruel to drive it out.”

the worthy woman bustled off, and i crouched nearer the fire; my head
felt hot, and the rest of me chill: moreover, i was excited, almost to
a pitch of foolishness, through my nerves and brain. this caused me to
feel, not uncomfortable, but rather fearful (as i am still) of serious
effects from the incidents of to-day and yesterday. she returned
presently, bringing a smoking basin and a basket of work; and, having
placed the former on the hob, drew in her seat, evidently pleased to
find me so companionable.

* * * * *


before i came to live here, she commenced—waiting no farther invitation
to her story—i was almost always at wuthering heights; because my
mother had nursed mr. hindley earnshaw, that was hareton’s father, and
i got used to playing with the children: i ran errands too, and helped
to make hay, and hung about the farm ready for anything that anybody
would set me to. one fine summer morning—it was the beginning of
harvest, i remember—mr. earnshaw, the old master, came downstairs,
dressed for a journey; and, after he had told joseph what was to be
done during the day, he turned to hindley, and cathy, and me—for i sat
eating my porridge with them—and he said, speaking to his son, “now, my
bonny man, i’m going to liverpool to-day, what shall i bring you? you
may choose what you like: only let it be little, for i shall walk there
and back: sixty miles each way, that is a long spell!” hindley named a
fiddle, and then he asked miss cathy; she was hardly six years old, but
she could ride any horse in the stable, and she chose a whip. he did
not forget me; for he had a kind heart, though he was rather severe
sometimes. he promised to bring me a pocketful of apples and pears, and
then he kissed his children, said good-bye, and set off.

it seemed a long while to us all—the three days of his absence—and
often did little cathy ask when he would be home. mrs. earnshaw
expected him by supper-time on the third evening, and she put the meal
off hour after hour; there were no signs of his coming, however, and at
last the children got tired of running down to the gate to look. then
it grew dark; she would have had them to bed, but they begged sadly to
be allowed to stay up; and, just about eleven o’clock, the door-latch
was raised quietly, and in stepped the master. he threw himself into a
chair, laughing and groaning, and bid them all stand off, for he was
nearly killed—he would not have such another walk for the three
kingdoms.

“and at the end of it to be flighted to death!” he said, opening his
great-coat, which he held bundled up in his arms. “see here, wife! i
was never so beaten with anything in my life: but you must e’en take it
as a gift of god; though it’s as dark almost as if it came from the
devil.”

we crowded round, and over miss cathy’s head i had a peep at a dirty,
ragged, black-haired child; big enough both to walk and talk: indeed,
its face looked older than catherine’s; yet when it was set on its
feet, it only stared round, and repeated over and over again some
gibberish that nobody could understand. i was frightened, and mrs.
earnshaw was ready to fling it out of doors: she did fly up, asking how
he could fashion to bring that gipsy brat into the house, when they had
their own bairns to feed and fend for? what he meant to do with it, and
whether he were mad? the master tried to explain the matter; but he was
really half dead with fatigue, and all that i could make out, amongst
her scolding, was a tale of his seeing it starving, and houseless, and
as good as dumb, in the streets of liverpool, where he picked it up and
inquired for its owner. not a soul knew to whom it belonged, he said;
and his money and time being both limited, he thought it better to take
it home with him at once, than run into vain expenses there: because he
was determined he would not leave it as he found it. well, the
conclusion was, that my mistress grumbled herself calm; and mr.
earnshaw told me to wash it, and give it clean things, and let it sleep
with the children.

hindley and cathy contented themselves with looking and listening till
peace was restored: then, both began searching their father’s pockets
for the presents he had promised them. the former was a boy of
fourteen, but when he drew out what had been a fiddle, crushed to
morsels in the great-coat, he blubbered aloud; and cathy, when she
learned the master had lost her whip in attending on the stranger,
showed her humour by grinning and spitting at the stupid little thing;
earning for her pains a sound blow from her father, to teach her
cleaner manners. they entirely refused to have it in bed with them, or
even in their room; and i had no more sense, so i put it on the landing
of the stairs, hoping it might be gone on the morrow. by chance, or
else attracted by hearing his voice, it crept to mr. earnshaw’s door,
and there he found it on quitting his chamber. inquiries were made as
to how it got there; i was obliged to confess, and in recompense for my
cowardice and inhumanity was sent out of the house.

this was heathcliff’s first introduction to the family. on coming back
a few days afterwards (for i did not consider my banishment perpetual),
i found they had christened him “heathcliff”: it was the name of a son
who died in childhood, and it has served him ever since, both for
christian and surname. miss cathy and he were now very thick; but
hindley hated him: and to say the truth i did the same; and we plagued
and went on with him shamefully: for i wasn’t reasonable enough to feel
my injustice, and the mistress never put in a word on his behalf when
she saw him wronged.

he seemed a sullen, patient child; hardened, perhaps, to ill-treatment:
he would stand hindley’s blows without winking or shedding a tear, and
my pinches moved him only to draw in a breath and open his eyes, as if
he had hurt himself by accident, and nobody was to blame. this
endurance made old earnshaw furious, when he discovered his son
persecuting the poor fatherless child, as he called him. he took to
heathcliff strangely, believing all he said (for that matter, he said
precious little, and generally the truth), and petting him up far above
cathy, who was too mischievous and wayward for a favourite.

so, from the very beginning, he bred bad feeling in the house; and at
mrs. earnshaw’s death, which happened in less than two years after, the
young master had learned to regard his father as an oppressor rather
than a friend, and heathcliff as a usurper of his parent’s affections
and his privileges; and he grew bitter with brooding over these
injuries. i sympathised a while; but when the children fell ill of the
measles, and i had to tend them, and take on me the cares of a woman at
once, i changed my idea. heathcliff was dangerously sick; and while he
lay at the worst he would have me constantly by his pillow: i suppose
he felt i did a good deal for him, and he hadn’t wit to guess that i
was compelled to do it. however, i will say this, he was the quietest
child that ever nurse watched over. the difference between him and the
others forced me to be less partial. cathy and her brother harassed me
terribly: _he_ was as uncomplaining as a lamb; though hardness, not
gentleness, made him give little trouble.

he got through, and the doctor affirmed it was in a great measure owing
to me, and praised me for my care. i was vain of his commendations, and
softened towards the being by whose means i earned them, and thus
hindley lost his last ally: still i couldn’t dote on heathcliff, and i
wondered often what my master saw to admire so much in the sullen boy;
who never, to my recollection, repaid his indulgence by any sign of
gratitude. he was not insolent to his benefactor, he was simply
insensible; though knowing perfectly the hold he had on his heart, and
conscious he had only to speak and all the house would be obliged to
bend to his wishes. as an instance, i remember mr. earnshaw once bought
a couple of colts at the parish fair, and gave the lads each one.
heathcliff took the handsomest, but it soon fell lame, and when he
discovered it, he said to hindley—

“you must exchange horses with me: i don’t like mine; and if you won’t
i shall tell your father of the three thrashings you’ve given me this
week, and show him my arm, which is black to the shoulder.” hindley put
out his tongue, and cuffed him over the ears. “you’d better do it at
once,” he persisted, escaping to the porch (they were in the stable):
“you will have to: and if i speak of these blows, you’ll get them again
with interest.” “off, dog!” cried hindley, threatening him with an iron
weight used for weighing potatoes and hay. “throw it,” he replied,
standing still, “and then i’ll tell how you boasted that you would turn
me out of doors as soon as he died, and see whether he will not turn
you out directly.” hindley threw it, hitting him on the breast, and
down he fell, but staggered up immediately, breathless and white; and,
had not i prevented it, he would have gone just so to the master, and
got full revenge by letting his condition plead for him, intimating who
had caused it. “take my colt, gipsy, then!” said young earnshaw. “and i
pray that he may break your neck: take him, and be damned, you beggarly
interloper! and wheedle my father out of all he has: only afterwards
show him what you are, imp of satan.—and take that, i hope he’ll kick
out your brains!”

heathcliff had gone to loose the beast, and shift it to his own stall;
he was passing behind it, when hindley finished his speech by knocking
him under its feet, and without stopping to examine whether his hopes
were fulfilled, ran away as fast as he could. i was surprised to
witness how coolly the child gathered himself up, and went on with his
intention; exchanging saddles and all, and then sitting down on a
bundle of hay to overcome the qualm which the violent blow occasioned,
before he entered the house. i persuaded him easily to let me lay the
blame of his bruises on the horse: he minded little what tale was told
since he had what he wanted. he complained so seldom, indeed, of such
stirs as these, that i really thought him not vindictive: i was
deceived completely, as you will hear.




chapter v


in the course of time mr. earnshaw began to fail. he had been active
and healthy, yet his strength left him suddenly; and when he was
confined to the chimney-corner he grew grievously irritable. a nothing
vexed him; and suspected slights of his authority nearly threw him into
fits. this was especially to be remarked if any one attempted to impose
upon, or domineer over, his favourite: he was painfully jealous lest a
word should be spoken amiss to him; seeming to have got into his head
the notion that, because he liked heathcliff, all hated, and longed to
do him an ill-turn. it was a disadvantage to the lad; for the kinder
among us did not wish to fret the master, so we humoured his
partiality; and that humouring was rich nourishment to the child’s
pride and black tempers. still it became in a manner necessary; twice,
or thrice, hindley’s manifestation of scorn, while his father was near,
roused the old man to a fury: he seized his stick to strike him, and
shook with rage that he could not do it.

at last, our curate (we had a curate then who made the living answer by
teaching the little lintons and earnshaws, and farming his bit of land
himself) advised that the young man should be sent to college; and mr.
earnshaw agreed, though with a heavy spirit, for he said—“hindley was
nought, and would never thrive as where he wandered.”

i hoped heartily we should have peace now. it hurt me to think the
master should be made uncomfortable by his own good deed. i fancied the
discontent of age and disease arose from his family disagreements; as
he would have it that it did: really, you know, sir, it was in his
sinking frame. we might have got on tolerably, notwithstanding, but for
two people—miss cathy, and joseph, the servant: you saw him, i daresay,
up yonder. he was, and is yet most likely, the wearisomest
self-righteous pharisee that ever ransacked a bible to rake the
promises to himself and fling the curses to his neighbours. by his
knack of sermonising and pious discoursing, he contrived to make a
great impression on mr. earnshaw; and the more feeble the master
became, the more influence he gained. he was relentless in worrying him
about his soul’s concerns, and about ruling his children rigidly. he
encouraged him to regard hindley as a reprobate; and, night after
night, he regularly grumbled out a long string of tales against
heathcliff and catherine: always minding to flatter earnshaw’s weakness
by heaping the heaviest blame on the latter.

certainly she had ways with her such as i never saw a child take up
before; and she put all of us past our patience fifty times and oftener
in a day: from the hour she came downstairs till the hour she went to
bed, we had not a minute’s security that she wouldn’t be in mischief.
her spirits were always at high-water mark, her tongue always
going—singing, laughing, and plaguing everybody who would not do the
same. a wild, wicked slip she was—but she had the bonniest eye, the
sweetest smile, and lightest foot in the parish: and, after all, i
believe she meant no harm; for when once she made you cry in good
earnest, it seldom happened that she would not keep you company, and
oblige you to be quiet that you might comfort her. she was much too
fond of heathcliff. the greatest punishment we could invent for her was
to keep her separate from him: yet she got chided more than any of us
on his account. in play, she liked exceedingly to act the little
mistress; using her hands freely, and commanding her companions: she
did so to me, but i would not bear slapping and ordering; and so i let
her know.

now, mr. earnshaw did not understand jokes from his children: he had
always been strict and grave with them; and catherine, on her part, had
no idea why her father should be crosser and less patient in his ailing
condition than he was in his prime. his peevish reproofs wakened in her
a naughty delight to provoke him: she was never so happy as when we
were all scolding her at once, and she defying us with her bold, saucy
look, and her ready words; turning joseph’s religious curses into
ridicule, baiting me, and doing just what her father hated most—showing
how her pretended insolence, which he thought real, had more power over
heathcliff than his kindness: how the boy would do _her_ bidding in
anything, and _his_ only when it suited his own inclination. after
behaving as badly as possible all day, she sometimes came fondling to
make it up at night. “nay, cathy,” the old man would say, “i cannot
love thee, thou’rt worse than thy brother. go, say thy prayers, child,
and ask god’s pardon. i doubt thy mother and i must rue that we ever
reared thee!” that made her cry, at first; and then being repulsed
continually hardened her, and she laughed if i told her to say she was
sorry for her faults, and beg to be forgiven.

but the hour came, at last, that ended mr. earnshaw’s troubles on
earth. he died quietly in his chair one october evening, seated by the
fire-side. a high wind blustered round the house, and roared in the
chimney: it sounded wild and stormy, yet it was not cold, and we were
all together—i, a little removed from the hearth, busy at my knitting,
and joseph reading his bible near the table (for the servants generally
sat in the house then, after their work was done). miss cathy had been
sick, and that made her still; she leant against her father’s knee, and
heathcliff was lying on the floor with his head in her lap. i remember
the master, before he fell into a doze, stroking her bonny hair—it
pleased him rarely to see her gentle—and saying, “why canst thou not
always be a good lass, cathy?” and she turned her face up to his, and
laughed, and answered, “why cannot you always be a good man, father?”
but as soon as she saw him vexed again, she kissed his hand, and said
she would sing him to sleep. she began singing very low, till his
fingers dropped from hers, and his head sank on his breast. then i told
her to hush, and not stir, for fear she should wake him. we all kept as
mute as mice a full half-hour, and should have done so longer, only
joseph, having finished his chapter, got up and said that he must rouse
the master for prayers and bed. he stepped forward, and called him by
name, and touched his shoulder; but he would not move: so he took the
candle and looked at him. i thought there was something wrong as he set
down the light; and seizing the children each by an arm, whispered them
to “frame upstairs, and make little din—they might pray alone that
evening—he had summut to do.”

“i shall bid father good-night first,” said catherine, putting her arms
round his neck, before we could hinder her. the poor thing discovered
her loss directly—she screamed out—“oh, he’s dead, heathcliff! he’s
dead!” and they both set up a heart-breaking cry.

i joined my wail to theirs, loud and bitter; but joseph asked what we
could be thinking of to roar in that way over a saint in heaven. he
told me to put on my cloak and run to gimmerton for the doctor and the
parson. i could not guess the use that either would be of, then.
however, i went, through wind and rain, and brought one, the doctor,
back with me; the other said he would come in the morning. leaving
joseph to explain matters, i ran to the children’s room: their door was
ajar, i saw they had never lain down, though it was past midnight; but
they were calmer, and did not need me to console them. the little souls
were comforting each other with better thoughts than i could have hit
on: no parson in the world ever pictured heaven so beautifully as they
did, in their innocent talk; and, while i sobbed and listened, i could
not help wishing we were all there safe together.




chapter vi


mr. hindley came home to the funeral; and—a thing that amazed us, and
set the neighbours gossiping right and left—he brought a wife with him.
what she was, and where she was born, he never informed us: probably,
she had neither money nor name to recommend her, or he would scarcely
have kept the union from his father.

she was not one that would have disturbed the house much on her own
account. every object she saw, the moment she crossed the threshold,
appeared to delight her; and every circumstance that took place about
her: except the preparing for the burial, and the presence of the
mourners. i thought she was half silly, from her behaviour while that
went on: she ran into her chamber, and made me come with her, though i
should have been dressing the children: and there she sat shivering and
clasping her hands, and asking repeatedly—“are they gone yet?” then she
began describing with hysterical emotion the effect it produced on her
to see black; and started, and trembled, and, at last, fell
a-weeping—and when i asked what was the matter, answered, she didn’t
know; but she felt so afraid of dying! i imagined her as little likely
to die as myself. she was rather thin, but young, and
fresh-complexioned, and her eyes sparkled as bright as diamonds. i did
remark, to be sure, that mounting the stairs made her breathe very
quick; that the least sudden noise set her all in a quiver, and that
she coughed troublesomely sometimes: but i knew nothing of what these
symptoms portended, and had no impulse to sympathise with her. we don’t
in general take to foreigners here, mr. lockwood, unless they take to
us first.

young earnshaw was altered considerably in the three years of his
absence. he had grown sparer, and lost his colour, and spoke and
dressed quite differently; and, on the very day of his return, he told
joseph and me we must thenceforth quarter ourselves in the
back-kitchen, and leave the house for him. indeed, he would have
carpeted and papered a small spare room for a parlour; but his wife
expressed such pleasure at the white floor and huge glowing fireplace,
at the pewter dishes and delf-case, and dog-kennel, and the wide space
there was to move about in where they usually sat, that he thought it
unnecessary to her comfort, and so dropped the intention.

she expressed pleasure, too, at finding a sister among her new
acquaintance; and she prattled to catherine, and kissed her, and ran
about with her, and gave her quantities of presents, at the beginning.
her affection tired very soon, however, and when she grew peevish,
hindley became tyrannical. a few words from her, evincing a dislike to
heathcliff, were enough to rouse in him all his old hatred of the boy.
he drove him from their company to the servants, deprived him of the
instructions of the curate, and insisted that he should labour out of
doors instead; compelling him to do so as hard as any other lad on the
farm.

heathcliff bore his degradation pretty well at first, because cathy
taught him what she learnt, and worked or played with him in the
fields. they both promised fair to grow up as rude as savages; the
young master being entirely negligent how they behaved, and what they
did, so they kept clear of him. he would not even have seen after their
going to church on sundays, only joseph and the curate reprimanded his
carelessness when they absented themselves; and that reminded him to
order heathcliff a flogging, and catherine a fast from dinner or
supper. but it was one of their chief amusements to run away to the
moors in the morning and remain there all day, and the after punishment
grew a mere thing to laugh at. the curate might set as many chapters as
he pleased for catherine to get by heart, and joseph might thrash
heathcliff till his arm ached; they forgot everything the minute they
were together again: at least the minute they had contrived some
naughty plan of revenge; and many a time i’ve cried to myself to watch
them growing more reckless daily, and i not daring to speak a syllable,
for fear of losing the small power i still retained over the unfriended
creatures. one sunday evening, it chanced that they were banished from
the sitting-room, for making a noise, or a light offence of the kind;
and when i went to call them to supper, i could discover them nowhere.
we searched the house, above and below, and the yard and stables; they
were invisible: and, at last, hindley in a passion told us to bolt the
doors, and swore nobody should let them in that night. the household
went to bed; and i, too anxious to lie down, opened my lattice and put
my head out to hearken, though it rained: determined to admit them in
spite of the prohibition, should they return. in a while, i
distinguished steps coming up the road, and the light of a lantern
glimmered through the gate. i threw a shawl over my head and ran to
prevent them from waking mr. earnshaw by knocking. there was
heathcliff, by himself: it gave me a start to see him alone.

“where is miss catherine?” i cried hurriedly. “no accident, i hope?”
“at thrushcross grange,” he answered; “and i would have been there too,
but they had not the manners to ask me to stay.” “well, you will catch
it!” i said: “you’ll never be content till you’re sent about your
business. what in the world led you wandering to thrushcross grange?”
“let me get off my wet clothes, and i’ll tell you all about it, nelly,”
he replied. i bid him beware of rousing the master, and while he
undressed and i waited to put out the candle, he continued—“cathy and i
escaped from the wash-house to have a ramble at liberty, and getting a
glimpse of the grange lights, we thought we would just go and see
whether the lintons passed their sunday evenings standing shivering in
corners, while their father and mother sat eating and drinking, and
singing and laughing, and burning their eyes out before the fire. do
you think they do? or reading sermons, and being catechised by their
man-servant, and set to learn a column of scripture names, if they
don’t answer properly?” “probably not,” i responded. “they are good
children, no doubt, and don’t deserve the treatment you receive, for
your bad conduct.” “don’t cant, nelly,” he said: “nonsense! we ran from
the top of the heights to the park, without stopping—catherine
completely beaten in the race, because she was barefoot. you’ll have to
seek for her shoes in the bog to-morrow. we crept through a broken
hedge, groped our way up the path, and planted ourselves on a
flower-plot under the drawing-room window. the light came from thence;
they had not put up the shutters, and the curtains were only half
closed. both of us were able to look in by standing on the basement,
and clinging to the ledge, and we saw—ah! it was beautiful—a splendid
place carpeted with crimson, and crimson-covered chairs and tables, and
a pure white ceiling bordered by gold, a shower of glass-drops hanging
in silver chains from the centre, and shimmering with little soft
tapers. old mr. and mrs. linton were not there; edgar and his sister
had it entirely to themselves. shouldn’t they have been happy? we
should have thought ourselves in heaven! and now, guess what your good
children were doing? isabella—i believe she is eleven, a year younger
than cathy—lay screaming at the farther end of the room, shrieking as
if witches were running red-hot needles into her. edgar stood on the
hearth weeping silently, and in the middle of the table sat a little
dog, shaking its paw and yelping; which, from their mutual accusations,
we understood they had nearly pulled in two between them. the idiots!
that was their pleasure! to quarrel who should hold a heap of warm
hair, and each begin to cry because both, after struggling to get it,
refused to take it. we laughed outright at the petted things; we did
despise them! when would you catch me wishing to have what catherine
wanted? or find us by ourselves, seeking entertainment in yelling, and
sobbing, and rolling on the ground, divided by the whole room? i’d not
exchange, for a thousand lives, my condition here, for edgar linton’s
at thrushcross grange—not if i might have the privilege of flinging
joseph off the highest gable, and painting the house-front with
hindley’s blood!”

“hush, hush!” i interrupted. “still you have not told me, heathcliff,
how catherine is left behind?”

“i told you we laughed,” he answered. “the lintons heard us, and with
one accord they shot like arrows to the door; there was silence, and
then a cry, ‘oh, mamma, mamma! oh, papa! oh, mamma, come here. oh,
papa, oh!’ they really did howl out something in that way. we made
frightful noises to terrify them still more, and then we dropped off
the ledge, because somebody was drawing the bars, and we felt we had
better flee. i had cathy by the hand, and was urging her on, when all
at once she fell down. ‘run, heathcliff, run!’ she whispered. ‘they
have let the bull-dog loose, and he holds me!’ the devil had seized her
ankle, nelly: i heard his abominable snorting. she did not yell out—no!
she would have scorned to do it, if she had been spitted on the horns
of a mad cow. i did, though: i vociferated curses enough to annihilate
any fiend in christendom; and i got a stone and thrust it between his
jaws, and tried with all my might to cram it down his throat. a beast
of a servant came up with a lantern, at last, shouting—‘keep fast,
skulker, keep fast!’ he changed his note, however, when he saw
skulker’s game. the dog was throttled off; his huge, purple tongue
hanging half a foot out of his mouth, and his pendent lips streaming
with bloody slaver. the man took cathy up; she was sick: not from fear,
i’m certain, but from pain. he carried her in; i followed, grumbling
execrations and vengeance. ‘what prey, robert?’ hallooed linton from
the entrance. ‘skulker has caught a little girl, sir,’ he replied; ‘and
there’s a lad here,’ he added, making a clutch at me, ‘who looks an
out-and-outer! very like the robbers were for putting them through the
window to open the doors to the gang after all were asleep, that they
might murder us at their ease. hold your tongue, you foul-mouthed
thief, you! you shall go to the gallows for this. mr. linton, sir,
don’t lay by your gun.’ ‘no, no, robert,’ said the old fool. ‘the
rascals knew that yesterday was my rent-day: they thought to have me
cleverly. come in; i’ll furnish them a reception. there, john, fasten
the chain. give skulker some water, jenny. to beard a magistrate in his
stronghold, and on the sabbath, too! where will their insolence stop?
oh, my dear mary, look here! don’t be afraid, it is but a boy—yet the
villain scowls so plainly in his face; would it not be a kindness to
the country to hang him at once, before he shows his nature in acts as
well as features?’ he pulled me under the chandelier, and mrs. linton
placed her spectacles on her nose and raised her hands in horror. the
cowardly children crept nearer also, isabella lisping—‘frightful thing!
put him in the cellar, papa. he’s exactly like the son of the
fortune-teller that stole my tame pheasant. isn’t he, edgar?’

“while they examined me, cathy came round; she heard the last speech,
and laughed. edgar linton, after an inquisitive stare, collected
sufficient wit to recognise her. they see us at church, you know,
though we seldom meet them elsewhere. ‘that’s miss earnshaw!’ he
whispered to his mother, ‘and look how skulker has bitten her—how her
foot bleeds!’

“‘miss earnshaw? nonsense!’ cried the dame; ‘miss earnshaw scouring the
country with a gipsy! and yet, my dear, the child is in mourning—surely
it is—and she may be lamed for life!’

“‘what culpable carelessness in her brother!’ exclaimed mr. linton,
turning from me to catherine. ‘i’ve understood from shielders’” (that
was the curate, sir) “‘that he lets her grow up in absolute heathenism.
but who is this? where did she pick up this companion? oho! i declare
he is that strange acquisition my late neighbour made, in his journey
to liverpool—a little lascar, or an american or spanish castaway.’

“‘a wicked boy, at all events,’ remarked the old lady, ‘and quite unfit
for a decent house! did you notice his language, linton? i’m shocked
that my children should have heard it.’

“i recommenced cursing—don’t be angry, nelly—and so robert was ordered
to take me off. i refused to go without cathy; he dragged me into the
garden, pushed the lantern into my hand, assured me that mr. earnshaw
should be informed of my behaviour, and, bidding me march directly,
secured the door again. the curtains were still looped up at one
corner, and i resumed my station as spy; because, if catherine had
wished to return, i intended shattering their great glass panes to a
million of fragments, unless they let her out. she sat on the sofa
quietly. mrs. linton took off the grey cloak of the dairy-maid which we
had borrowed for our excursion, shaking her head and expostulating with
her, i suppose: she was a young lady, and they made a distinction
between her treatment and mine. then the woman-servant brought a basin
of warm water, and washed her feet; and mr. linton mixed a tumbler of
negus, and isabella emptied a plateful of cakes into her lap, and edgar
stood gaping at a distance. afterwards, they dried and combed her
beautiful hair, and gave her a pair of enormous slippers, and wheeled
her to the fire; and i left her, as merry as she could be, dividing her
food between the little dog and skulker, whose nose she pinched as he
ate; and kindling a spark of spirit in the vacant blue eyes of the
lintons—a dim reflection from her own enchanting face. i saw they were
full of stupid admiration; she is so immeasurably superior to them—to
everybody on earth, is she not, nelly?”

“there will more come of this business than you reckon on,” i answered,
covering him up and extinguishing the light. “you are incurable,
heathcliff; and mr. hindley will have to proceed to extremities, see if
he won’t.” my words came truer than i desired. the luckless adventure
made earnshaw furious. and then mr. linton, to mend matters, paid us a
visit himself on the morrow, and read the young master such a lecture
on the road he guided his family, that he was stirred to look about
him, in earnest. heathcliff received no flogging, but he was told that
the first word he spoke to miss catherine should ensure a dismissal;
and mrs. earnshaw undertook to keep her sister-in-law in due restraint
when she returned home; employing art, not force: with force she would
have found it impossible.




chapter vii


cathy stayed at thrushcross grange five weeks: till christmas. by that
time her ankle was thoroughly cured, and her manners much improved. the
mistress visited her often in the interval, and commenced her plan of
reform by trying to raise her self-respect with fine clothes and
flattery, which she took readily; so that, instead of a wild, hatless
little savage jumping into the house, and rushing to squeeze us all
breathless, there lighted from a handsome black pony a very dignified
person, with brown ringlets falling from the cover of a feathered
beaver, and a long cloth habit, which she was obliged to hold up with
both hands that she might sail in. hindley lifted her from her horse,
exclaiming delightedly, “why, cathy, you are quite a beauty! i should
scarcely have known you: you look like a lady now. isabella linton is
not to be compared with her, is she, frances?” “isabella has not her
natural advantages,” replied his wife: “but she must mind and not grow
wild again here. ellen, help miss catherine off with her things—stay,
dear, you will disarrange your curls—let me untie your hat.”

i removed the habit, and there shone forth beneath a grand plaid silk
frock, white trousers, and burnished shoes; and, while her eyes
sparkled joyfully when the dogs came bounding up to welcome her, she
dared hardly touch them lest they should fawn upon her splendid
garments. she kissed me gently: i was all flour making the christmas
cake, and it would not have done to give me a hug; and then she looked
round for heathcliff. mr. and mrs. earnshaw watched anxiously their
meeting; thinking it would enable them to judge, in some measure, what
grounds they had for hoping to succeed in separating the two friends.

heathcliff was hard to discover, at first. if he were careless, and
uncared for, before catherine’s absence, he had been ten times more so
since. nobody but i even did him the kindness to call him a dirty boy,
and bid him wash himself, once a week; and children of his age seldom
have a natural pleasure in soap and water. therefore, not to mention
his clothes, which had seen three months’ service in mire and dust, and
his thick uncombed hair, the surface of his face and hands was dismally
beclouded. he might well skulk behind the settle, on beholding such a
bright, graceful damsel enter the house, instead of a rough-headed
counterpart of himself, as he expected. “is heathcliff not here?” she
demanded, pulling off her gloves, and displaying fingers wonderfully
whitened with doing nothing and staying indoors.

“heathcliff, you may come forward,” cried mr. hindley, enjoying his
discomfiture, and gratified to see what a forbidding young blackguard
he would be compelled to present himself. “you may come and wish miss
catherine welcome, like the other servants.”

cathy, catching a glimpse of her friend in his concealment, flew to
embrace him; she bestowed seven or eight kisses on his cheek within the
second, and then stopped, and drawing back, burst into a laugh,
exclaiming, “why, how very black and cross you look! and how—how funny
and grim! but that’s because i’m used to edgar and isabella linton.
well, heathcliff, have you forgotten me?”

she had some reason to put the question, for shame and pride threw
double gloom over his countenance, and kept him immovable.

“shake hands, heathcliff,” said mr. earnshaw, condescendingly; “once in
a way, that is permitted.”

“i shall not,” replied the boy, finding his tongue at last; “i shall
not stand to be laughed at. i shall not bear it!”

and he would have broken from the circle, but miss cathy seized him
again.

“i did not mean to laugh at you,” she said; “i could not hinder myself:
heathcliff, shake hands at least! what are you sulky for? it was only
that you looked odd. if you wash your face and brush your hair, it will
be all right: but you are so dirty!”

she gazed concernedly at the dusky fingers she held in her own, and
also at her dress; which she feared had gained no embellishment from
its contact with his.

“you needn’t have touched me!” he answered, following her eye and
snatching away his hand. “i shall be as dirty as i please: and i like
to be dirty, and i will be dirty.”

with that he dashed headforemost out of the room, amid the merriment of
the master and mistress, and to the serious disturbance of catherine;
who could not comprehend how her remarks should have produced such an
exhibition of bad temper.

after playing lady’s-maid to the new-comer, and putting my cakes in the
oven, and making the house and kitchen cheerful with great fires,
befitting christmas-eve, i prepared to sit down and amuse myself by
singing carols, all alone; regardless of joseph’s affirmations that he
considered the merry tunes i chose as next door to songs. he had
retired to private prayer in his chamber, and mr. and mrs. earnshaw
were engaging missy’s attention by sundry gay trifles bought for her to
present to the little lintons, as an acknowledgment of their kindness.
they had invited them to spend the morrow at wuthering heights, and the
invitation had been accepted, on one condition: mrs. linton begged that
her darlings might be kept carefully apart from that “naughty swearing
boy.”

under these circumstances i remained solitary. i smelt the rich scent
of the heating spices; and admired the shining kitchen utensils, the
polished clock, decked in holly, the silver mugs ranged on a tray ready
to be filled with mulled ale for supper; and above all, the speckless
purity of my particular care—the scoured and well-swept floor. i gave
due inward applause to every object, and then i remembered how old
earnshaw used to come in when all was tidied, and call me a cant lass,
and slip a shilling into my hand as a christmas-box; and from that i
went on to think of his fondness for heathcliff, and his dread lest he
should suffer neglect after death had removed him: and that naturally
led me to consider the poor lad’s situation now, and from singing i
changed my mind to crying. it struck me soon, however, there would be
more sense in endeavouring to repair some of his wrongs than shedding
tears over them: i got up and walked into the court to seek him. he was
not far; i found him smoothing the glossy coat of the new pony in the
stable, and feeding the other beasts, according to custom.

“make haste, heathcliff!” i said, “the kitchen is so comfortable; and
joseph is upstairs: make haste, and let me dress you smart before miss
cathy comes out, and then you can sit together, with the whole hearth
to yourselves, and have a long chatter till bedtime.”

he proceeded with his task, and never turned his head towards me.

“come—are you coming?” i continued. “there’s a little cake for each of
you, nearly enough; and you’ll need half-an-hour’s donning.”

i waited five minutes, but getting no answer left him. catherine supped
with her brother and sister-in-law: joseph and i joined at an
unsociable meal, seasoned with reproofs on one side and sauciness on
the other. his cake and cheese remained on the table all night for the
fairies. he managed to continue work till nine o’clock, and then
marched dumb and dour to his chamber. cathy sat up late, having a world
of things to order for the reception of her new friends: she came into
the kitchen once to speak to her old one; but he was gone, and she only
stayed to ask what was the matter with him, and then went back. in the
morning he rose early; and, as it was a holiday, carried his ill-humour
on to the moors; not re-appearing till the family were departed for
church. fasting and reflection seemed to have brought him to a better
spirit. he hung about me for a while, and having screwed up his
courage, exclaimed abruptly—“nelly, make me decent, i’m going to be
good.”

“high time, heathcliff,” i said; “you _have_ grieved catherine: she’s
sorry she ever came home, i daresay! it looks as if you envied her,
because she is more thought of than you.”

the notion of _envying_ catherine was incomprehensible to him, but the
notion of grieving her he understood clearly enough.

“did she say she was grieved?” he inquired, looking very serious.

“she cried when i told her you were off again this morning.”

“well, _i_ cried last night,” he returned, “and i had more reason to
cry than she.”

“yes: you had the reason of going to bed with a proud heart and an
empty stomach,” said i. “proud people breed sad sorrows for themselves.
but, if you be ashamed of your touchiness, you must ask pardon, mind,
when she comes in. you must go up and offer to kiss her, and say—you
know best what to say; only do it heartily, and not as if you thought
her converted into a stranger by her grand dress. and now, though i
have dinner to get ready, i’ll steal time to arrange you so that edgar
linton shall look quite a doll beside you: and that he does. you are
younger, and yet, i’ll be bound, you are taller and twice as broad
across the shoulders; you could knock him down in a twinkling; don’t
you feel that you could?”

heathcliff’s face brightened a moment; then it was overcast afresh, and
he sighed.

“but, nelly, if i knocked him down twenty times, that wouldn’t make him
less handsome or me more so. i wish i had light hair and a fair skin,
and was dressed and behaved as well, and had a chance of being as rich
as he will be!”

“and cried for mamma at every turn,” i added, “and trembled if a
country lad heaved his fist against you, and sat at home all day for a
shower of rain. oh, heathcliff, you are showing a poor spirit! come to
the glass, and i’ll let you see what you should wish. do you mark those
two lines between your eyes; and those thick brows, that, instead of
rising arched, sink in the middle; and that couple of black fiends, so
deeply buried, who never open their windows boldly, but lurk glinting
under them, like devil’s spies? wish and learn to smooth away the surly
wrinkles, to raise your lids frankly, and change the fiends to
confident, innocent angels, suspecting and doubting nothing, and always
seeing friends where they are not sure of foes. don’t get the
expression of a vicious cur that appears to know the kicks it gets are
its desert, and yet hates all the world, as well as the kicker, for
what it suffers.”

“in other words, i must wish for edgar linton’s great blue eyes and
even forehead,” he replied. “i do—and that won’t help me to them.”

“a good heart will help you to a bonny face, my lad,” i continued, “if
you were a regular black; and a bad one will turn the bonniest into
something worse than ugly. and now that we’ve done washing, and
combing, and sulking—tell me whether you don’t think yourself rather
handsome? i’ll tell you, i do. you’re fit for a prince in disguise. who
knows but your father was emperor of china, and your mother an indian
queen, each of them able to buy up, with one week’s income, wuthering
heights and thrushcross grange together? and you were kidnapped by
wicked sailors and brought to england. were i in your place, i would
frame high notions of my birth; and the thoughts of what i was should
give me courage and dignity to support the oppressions of a little
farmer!”

so i chattered on; and heathcliff gradually lost his frown and began to
look quite pleasant, when all at once our conversation was interrupted
by a rumbling sound moving up the road and entering the court. he ran
to the window and i to the door, just in time to behold the two lintons
descend from the family carriage, smothered in cloaks and furs, and the
earnshaws dismount from their horses: they often rode to church in
winter. catherine took a hand of each of the children, and brought them
into the house and set them before the fire, which quickly put colour
into their white faces.

i urged my companion to hasten now and show his amiable humour, and he
willingly obeyed; but ill luck would have it that, as he opened the
door leading from the kitchen on one side, hindley opened it on the
other. they met, and the master, irritated at seeing him clean and
cheerful, or, perhaps, eager to keep his promise to mrs. linton, shoved
him back with a sudden thrust, and angrily bade joseph “keep the fellow
out of the room—send him into the garret till dinner is over. he’ll be
cramming his fingers in the tarts and stealing the fruit, if left alone
with them a minute.”

“nay, sir,” i could not avoid answering, “he’ll touch nothing, not he:
and i suppose he must have his share of the dainties as well as we.”

“he shall have his share of my hand, if i catch him downstairs till
dark,” cried hindley. “begone, you vagabond! what! you are attempting
the coxcomb, are you? wait till i get hold of those elegant locks—see
if i won’t pull them a bit longer!”

“they are long enough already,” observed master linton, peeping from
the doorway; “i wonder they don’t make his head ache. it’s like a
colt’s mane over his eyes!”

he ventured this remark without any intention to insult; but
heathcliff’s violent nature was not prepared to endure the appearance
of impertinence from one whom he seemed to hate, even then, as a rival.
he seized a tureen of hot apple sauce, the first thing that came under
his gripe, and dashed it full against the speaker’s face and neck; who
instantly commenced a lament that brought isabella and catherine
hurrying to the place. mr. earnshaw snatched up the culprit directly
and conveyed him to his chamber; where, doubtless, he administered a
rough remedy to cool the fit of passion, for he appeared red and
breathless. i got the dish-cloth, and rather spitefully scrubbed
edgar’s nose and mouth, affirming it served him right for meddling. his
sister began weeping to go home, and cathy stood by confounded,
blushing for all.

“you should not have spoken to him!” she expostulated with master
linton. “he was in a bad temper, and now you’ve spoilt your visit; and
he’ll be flogged: i hate him to be flogged! i can’t eat my dinner. why
did you speak to him, edgar?”

“i didn’t,” sobbed the youth, escaping from my hands, and finishing the
remainder of the purification with his cambric pocket-handkerchief. “i
promised mamma that i wouldn’t say one word to him, and i didn’t.”

“well, don’t cry,” replied catherine, contemptuously; “you’re not
killed. don’t make more mischief; my brother is coming: be quiet! hush,
isabella! has anybody hurt _you?_”

“there, there, children—to your seats!” cried hindley, bustling in.
“that brute of a lad has warmed me nicely. next time, master edgar,
take the law into your own fists—it will give you an appetite!”

the little party recovered its equanimity at sight of the fragrant
feast. they were hungry after their ride, and easily consoled, since no
real harm had befallen them. mr. earnshaw carved bountiful platefuls,
and the mistress made them merry with lively talk. i waited behind her
chair, and was pained to behold catherine, with dry eyes and an
indifferent air, commence cutting up the wing of a goose before her.
“an unfeeling child,” i thought to myself; “how lightly she dismisses
her old playmate’s troubles. i could not have imagined her to be so
selfish.” she lifted a mouthful to her lips: then she set it down
again: her cheeks flushed, and the tears gushed over them. she slipped
her fork to the floor, and hastily dived under the cloth to conceal her
emotion. i did not call her unfeeling long; for i perceived she was in
purgatory throughout the day, and wearying to find an opportunity of
getting by herself, or paying a visit to heathcliff, who had been
locked up by the master: as i discovered, on endeavouring to introduce
to him a private mess of victuals.

in the evening we had a dance. cathy begged that he might be liberated
then, as isabella linton had no partner: her entreaties were vain, and
i was appointed to supply the deficiency. we got rid of all gloom in
the excitement of the exercise, and our pleasure was increased by the
arrival of the gimmerton band, mustering fifteen strong: a trumpet, a
trombone, clarionets, bassoons, french horns, and a bass viol, besides
singers. they go the rounds of all the respectable houses, and receive
contributions every christmas, and we esteemed it a first-rate treat to
hear them. after the usual carols had been sung, we set them to songs
and glees. mrs. earnshaw loved the music, and so they gave us plenty.

catherine loved it too: but she said it sounded sweetest at the top of
the steps, and she went up in the dark: i followed. they shut the house
door below, never noting our absence, it was so full of people. she
made no stay at the stairs’-head, but mounted farther, to the garret
where heathcliff was confined, and called him. he stubbornly declined
answering for a while: she persevered, and finally persuaded him to
hold communion with her through the boards. i let the poor things
converse unmolested, till i supposed the songs were going to cease, and
the singers to get some refreshment: then i clambered up the ladder to
warn her. instead of finding her outside, i heard her voice within. the
little monkey had crept by the skylight of one garret, along the roof,
into the skylight of the other, and it was with the utmost difficulty i
could coax her out again. when she did come, heathcliff came with her,
and she insisted that i should take him into the kitchen, as my
fellow-servant had gone to a neighbour’s, to be removed from the sound
of our “devil’s psalmody,” as it pleased him to call it. i told them i
intended by no means to encourage their tricks: but as the prisoner had
never broken his fast since yesterday’s dinner, i would wink at his
cheating mr. hindley that once. he went down: i set him a stool by the
fire, and offered him a quantity of good things: but he was sick and
could eat little, and my attempts to entertain him were thrown away. he
leant his two elbows on his knees, and his chin on his hands, and
remained rapt in dumb meditation. on my inquiring the subject of his
thoughts, he answered gravely—“i’m trying to settle how i shall pay
hindley back. i don’t care how long i wait, if i can only do it at
last. i hope he will not die before i do!”

“for shame, heathcliff!” said i. “it is for god to punish wicked
people; we should learn to forgive.”

“no, god won’t have the satisfaction that i shall,” he returned. “i
only wish i knew the best way! let me alone, and i’ll plan it out:
while i’m thinking of that i don’t feel pain.”

but, mr. lockwood, i forget these tales cannot divert you. i’m annoyed
how i should dream of chattering on at such a rate; and your gruel
cold, and you nodding for bed! i could have told heathcliff’s history,
all that you need hear, in half a dozen words.

* * * * *


thus interrupting herself, the housekeeper rose, and proceeded to lay
aside her sewing; but i felt incapable of moving from the hearth, and i
was very far from nodding. “sit still, mrs. dean,” i cried; “do sit
still another half-hour. you’ve done just right to tell the story
leisurely. that is the method i like; and you must finish it in the
same style. i am interested in every character you have mentioned, more
or less.”

“the clock is on the stroke of eleven, sir.”

“no matter—i’m not accustomed to go to bed in the long hours. one or
two is early enough for a person who lies till ten.”

“you shouldn’t lie till ten. there’s the very prime of the morning gone
long before that time. a person who has not done one-half his day’s
work by ten o’clock, runs a chance of leaving the other half undone.”

“nevertheless, mrs. dean, resume your chair; because to-morrow i intend
lengthening the night till afternoon. i prognosticate for myself an
obstinate cold, at least.”

“i hope not, sir. well, you must allow me to leap over some three
years; during that space mrs. earnshaw—”

“no, no, i’ll allow nothing of the sort! are you acquainted with the
mood of mind in which, if you were seated alone, and the cat licking
its kitten on the rug before you, you would watch the operation so
intently that puss’s neglect of one ear would put you seriously out of
temper?”

“a terribly lazy mood, i should say.”

“on the contrary, a tiresomely active one. it is mine, at present; and,
therefore, continue minutely. i perceive that people in these regions
acquire over people in towns the value that a spider in a dungeon does
over a spider in a cottage, to their various occupants; and yet the
deepened attraction is not entirely owing to the situation of the
looker-on. they _do_ live more in earnest, more in themselves, and less
in surface, change, and frivolous external things. i could fancy a love
for life here almost possible; and i was a fixed unbeliever in any love
of a year’s standing. one state resembles setting a hungry man down to
a single dish, on which he may concentrate his entire appetite and do
it justice; the other, introducing him to a table laid out by french
cooks: he can perhaps extract as much enjoyment from the whole; but
each part is a mere atom in his regard and remembrance.”

“oh! here we are the same as anywhere else, when you get to know us,”
observed mrs. dean, somewhat puzzled at my speech.

“excuse me,” i responded; “you, my good friend, are a striking evidence
against that assertion. excepting a few provincialisms of slight
consequence, you have no marks of the manners which i am habituated to
consider as peculiar to your class. i am sure you have thought a great
deal more than the generality of servants think. you have been
compelled to cultivate your reflective faculties for want of occasions
for frittering your life away in silly trifles.”

mrs. dean laughed.

“i certainly esteem myself a steady, reasonable kind of body,” she
said; “not exactly from living among the hills and seeing one set of
faces, and one series of actions, from year’s end to year’s end; but i
have undergone sharp discipline, which has taught me wisdom; and then,
i have read more than you would fancy, mr. lockwood. you could not open
a book in this library that i have not looked into, and got something
out of also: unless it be that range of greek and latin, and that of
french; and those i know one from another: it is as much as you can
expect of a poor man’s daughter. however, if i am to follow my story in
true gossip’s fashion, i had better go on; and instead of leaping three
years, i will be content to pass to the next summer—the summer of 1778,
that is nearly twenty-three years ago.”




chapter viii


on the morning of a fine june day my first bonny little nursling, and
the last of the ancient earnshaw stock, was born. we were busy with the
hay in a far-away field, when the girl that usually brought our
breakfasts came running an hour too soon across the meadow and up the
lane, calling me as she ran.

“oh, such a grand bairn!” she panted out. “the finest lad that ever
breathed! but the doctor says missis must go: he says she’s been in a
consumption these many months. i heard him tell mr. hindley: and now
she has nothing to keep her, and she’ll be dead before winter. you must
come home directly. you’re to nurse it, nelly: to feed it with sugar
and milk, and take care of it day and night. i wish i were you, because
it will be all yours when there is no missis!”

“but is she very ill?” i asked, flinging down my rake and tying my
bonnet.

“i guess she is; yet she looks bravely,” replied the girl, “and she
talks as if she thought of living to see it grow a man. she’s out of
her head for joy, it’s such a beauty! if i were her i’m certain i
should not die: i should get better at the bare sight of it, in spite
of kenneth. i was fairly mad at him. dame archer brought the cherub
down to master, in the house, and his face just began to light up, when
the old croaker steps forward, and says he—‘earnshaw, it’s a blessing
your wife has been spared to leave you this son. when she came, i felt
convinced we shouldn’t keep her long; and now, i must tell you, the
winter will probably finish her. don’t take on, and fret about it too
much: it can’t be helped. and besides, you should have known better
than to choose such a rush of a lass!’”

“and what did the master answer?” i inquired.

“i think he swore: but i didn’t mind him, i was straining to see the
bairn,” and she began again to describe it rapturously. i, as zealous
as herself, hurried eagerly home to admire, on my part; though i was
very sad for hindley’s sake. he had room in his heart only for two
idols—his wife and himself: he doted on both, and adored one, and i
couldn’t conceive how he would bear the loss.

when we got to wuthering heights, there he stood at the front door;
and, as i passed in, i asked, “how was the baby?”

“nearly ready to run about, nell!” he replied, putting on a cheerful
smile.

“and the mistress?” i ventured to inquire; “the doctor says she’s—”

“damn the doctor!” he interrupted, reddening. “frances is quite right:
she’ll be perfectly well by this time next week. are you going
upstairs? will you tell her that i’ll come, if she’ll promise not to
talk. i left her because she would not hold her tongue; and she
must—tell her mr. kenneth says she must be quiet.”

i delivered this message to mrs. earnshaw; she seemed in flighty
spirits, and replied merrily, “i hardly spoke a word, ellen, and there
he has gone out twice, crying. well, say i promise i won’t speak: but
that does not bind me not to laugh at him!”

poor soul! till within a week of her death that gay heart never failed
her; and her husband persisted doggedly, nay, furiously, in affirming
her health improved every day. when kenneth warned him that his
medicines were useless at that stage of the malady, and he needn’t put
him to further expense by attending her, he retorted, “i know you need
not—she’s well—she does not want any more attendance from you! she
never was in a consumption. it was a fever; and it is gone: her pulse
is as slow as mine now, and her cheek as cool.”

he told his wife the same story, and she seemed to believe him; but one
night, while leaning on his shoulder, in the act of saying she thought
she should be able to get up to-morrow, a fit of coughing took her—a
very slight one—he raised her in his arms; she put her two hands about
his neck, her face changed, and she was dead.

as the girl had anticipated, the child hareton fell wholly into my
hands. mr. earnshaw, provided he saw him healthy and never heard him
cry, was contented, as far as regarded him. for himself, he grew
desperate: his sorrow was of that kind that will not lament. he neither
wept nor prayed; he cursed and defied: execrated god and man, and gave
himself up to reckless dissipation. the servants could not bear his
tyrannical and evil conduct long: joseph and i were the only two that
would stay. i had not the heart to leave my charge; and besides, you
know, i had been his foster-sister, and excused his behaviour more
readily than a stranger would. joseph remained to hector over tenants
and labourers; and because it was his vocation to be where he had
plenty of wickedness to reprove.

the master’s bad ways and bad companions formed a pretty example for
catherine and heathcliff. his treatment of the latter was enough to
make a fiend of a saint. and, truly, it appeared as if the lad _were_
possessed of something diabolical at that period. he delighted to
witness hindley degrading himself past redemption; and became daily
more notable for savage sullenness and ferocity. i could not half tell
what an infernal house we had. the curate dropped calling, and nobody
decent came near us, at last; unless edgar linton’s visits to miss
cathy might be an exception. at fifteen she was the queen of the
country-side; she had no peer; and she did turn out a haughty,
headstrong creature! i own i did not like her, after infancy was past;
and i vexed her frequently by trying to bring down her arrogance: she
never took an aversion to me, though. she had a wondrous constancy to
old attachments: even heathcliff kept his hold on her affections
unalterably; and young linton, with all his superiority, found it
difficult to make an equally deep impression. he was my late master:
that is his portrait over the fireplace. it used to hang on one side,
and his wife’s on the other; but hers has been removed, or else you
might see something of what she was. can you make that out?

mrs. dean raised the candle, and i discerned a soft-featured face,
exceedingly resembling the young lady at the heights, but more pensive
and amiable in expression. it formed a sweet picture. the long light
hair curled slightly on the temples; the eyes were large and serious;
the figure almost too graceful. i did not marvel how catherine earnshaw
could forget her first friend for such an individual. i marvelled much
how he, with a mind to correspond with his person, could fancy my idea
of catherine earnshaw.

“a very agreeable portrait,” i observed to the house-keeper. “is it
like?”

“yes,” she answered; “but he looked better when he was animated; that
is his everyday countenance: he wanted spirit in general.”

catherine had kept up her acquaintance with the lintons since her
five-weeks’ residence among them; and as she had no temptation to show
her rough side in their company, and had the sense to be ashamed of
being rude where she experienced such invariable courtesy, she imposed
unwittingly on the old lady and gentleman by her ingenious cordiality;
gained the admiration of isabella, and the heart and soul of her
brother: acquisitions that flattered her from the first—for she was
full of ambition—and led her to adopt a double character without
exactly intending to deceive any one. in the place where she heard
heathcliff termed a “vulgar young ruffian,” and “worse than a brute,”
she took care not to act like him; but at home she had small
inclination to practise politeness that would only be laughed at, and
restrain an unruly nature when it would bring her neither credit nor
praise.

mr. edgar seldom mustered courage to visit wuthering heights openly. he
had a terror of earnshaw’s reputation, and shrunk from encountering
him; and yet he was always received with our best attempts at civility:
the master himself avoided offending him, knowing why he came; and if
he could not be gracious, kept out of the way. i rather think his
appearance there was distasteful to catherine; she was not artful,
never played the coquette, and had evidently an objection to her two
friends meeting at all; for when heathcliff expressed contempt of
linton in his presence, she could not half coincide, as she did in his
absence; and when linton evinced disgust and antipathy to heathcliff,
she dared not treat his sentiments with indifference, as if
depreciation of her playmate were of scarcely any consequence to her.
i’ve had many a laugh at her perplexities and untold troubles, which
she vainly strove to hide from my mockery. that sounds ill-natured: but
she was so proud, it became really impossible to pity her distresses,
till she should be chastened into more humility. she did bring herself,
finally, to confess, and to confide in me: there was not a soul else
that she might fashion into an adviser.

mr. hindley had gone from home one afternoon, and heathcliff presumed
to give himself a holiday on the strength of it. he had reached the age
of sixteen then, i think, and without having bad features, or being
deficient in intellect, he contrived to convey an impression of inward
and outward repulsiveness that his present aspect retains no traces of.
in the first place, he had by that time lost the benefit of his early
education: continual hard work, begun soon and concluded late, had
extinguished any curiosity he once possessed in pursuit of knowledge,
and any love for books or learning. his childhood’s sense of
superiority, instilled into him by the favours of old mr. earnshaw, was
faded away. he struggled long to keep up an equality with catherine in
her studies, and yielded with poignant though silent regret: but he
yielded completely; and there was no prevailing on him to take a step
in the way of moving upward, when he found he must, necessarily, sink
beneath his former level. then personal appearance sympathised with
mental deterioration: he acquired a slouching gait and ignoble look;
his naturally reserved disposition was exaggerated into an almost
idiotic excess of unsociable moroseness; and he took a grim pleasure,
apparently, in exciting the aversion rather than the esteem of his few
acquaintance.

catherine and he were constant companions still at his seasons of
respite from labour; but he had ceased to express his fondness for her
in words, and recoiled with angry suspicion from her girlish caresses,
as if conscious there could be no gratification in lavishing such marks
of affection on him. on the before-named occasion he came into the
house to announce his intention of doing nothing, while i was assisting
miss cathy to arrange her dress: she had not reckoned on his taking it
into his head to be idle; and imagining she would have the whole place
to herself, she managed, by some means, to inform mr. edgar of her
brother’s absence, and was then preparing to receive him.

“cathy, are you busy this afternoon?” asked heathcliff. “are you going
anywhere?”

“no, it is raining,” she answered.

“why have you that silk frock on, then?” he said. “nobody coming here,
i hope?”

“not that i know of,” stammered miss: “but you should be in the field
now, heathcliff. it is an hour past dinner time; i thought you were
gone.”

“hindley does not often free us from his accursed presence,” observed
the boy. “i’ll not work any more to-day: i’ll stay with you.”

“oh, but joseph will tell,” she suggested; “you’d better go!”

“joseph is loading lime on the further side of penistone crags; it will
take him till dark, and he’ll never know.”

so saying, he lounged to the fire, and sat down. catherine reflected
an instant, with knitted brows—she found it needful to smooth the way
for an intrusion. “isabella and edgar linton talked of calling this
afternoon,” she said, at the conclusion of a minute’s silence. “as it
rains, i hardly expect them; but they may come, and if they do, you run
the risk of being scolded for no good.”

“order ellen to say you are engaged, cathy,” he persisted; “don’t turn
me out for those pitiful, silly friends of yours! i’m on the point,
sometimes, of complaining that they—but i’ll not—”

“that they what?” cried catherine, gazing at him with a troubled
countenance. “oh, nelly!” she added petulantly, jerking her head away
from my hands, “you’ve combed my hair quite out of curl! that’s enough;
let me alone. what are you on the point of complaining about,
heathcliff?”

“nothing—only look at the almanack on that wall;” he pointed to a
framed sheet hanging near the window, and continued, “the crosses are
for the evenings you have spent with the lintons, the dots for those
spent with me. do you see? i’ve marked every day.”

“yes—very foolish: as if i took notice!” replied catherine, in a
peevish tone. “and where is the sense of that?”

“to show that i _do_ take notice,” said heathcliff.

“and should i always be sitting with you?” she demanded, growing more
irritated. “what good do i get? what do you talk about? you might be
dumb, or a baby, for anything you say to amuse me, or for anything you
do, either!”

“you never told me before that i talked too little, or that you
disliked my company, cathy!” exclaimed heathcliff, in much agitation.

“it’s no company at all, when people know nothing and say nothing,” she
muttered.

her companion rose up, but he hadn’t time to express his feelings
further, for a horse’s feet were heard on the flags, and having knocked
gently, young linton entered, his face brilliant with delight at the
unexpected summons he had received. doubtless catherine marked the
difference between her friends, as one came in and the other went out.
the contrast resembled what you see in exchanging a bleak, hilly, coal
country for a beautiful fertile valley; and his voice and greeting were
as opposite as his aspect. he had a sweet, low manner of speaking, and
pronounced his words as you do: that’s less gruff than we talk here,
and softer.

“i’m not come too soon, am i?” he said, casting a look at me: i had
begun to wipe the plate, and tidy some drawers at the far end in the
dresser.

“no,” answered catherine. “what are you doing there, nelly?”

“my work, miss,” i replied. (mr. hindley had given me directions to
make a third party in any private visits linton chose to pay.)

she stepped behind me and whispered crossly, “take yourself and your
dusters off; when company are in the house, servants don’t commence
scouring and cleaning in the room where they are!”

“it’s a good opportunity, now that master is away,” i answered aloud:
“he hates me to be fidgeting over these things in his presence. i’m
sure mr. edgar will excuse me.”

“i hate you to be fidgeting in _my_ presence,” exclaimed the young lady
imperiously, not allowing her guest time to speak: she had failed to
recover her equanimity since the little dispute with heathcliff.

“i’m sorry for it, miss catherine,” was my response; and i proceeded
assiduously with my occupation.

she, supposing edgar could not see her, snatched the cloth from my
hand, and pinched me, with a prolonged wrench, very spitefully on the
arm. i’ve said i did not love her, and rather relished mortifying her
vanity now and then: besides, she hurt me extremely; so i started up
from my knees, and screamed out, “oh, miss, that’s a nasty trick! you
have no right to nip me, and i’m not going to bear it.”

“i didn’t touch you, you lying creature!” cried she, her fingers
tingling to repeat the act, and her ears red with rage. she never had
power to conceal her passion, it always set her whole complexion in a
blaze.

“what’s that, then?” i retorted, showing a decided purple witness to
refute her.

she stamped her foot, wavered a moment, and then, irresistibly impelled
by the naughty spirit within her, slapped me on the cheek: a stinging
blow that filled both eyes with water.

“catherine, love! catherine!” interposed linton, greatly shocked at the
double fault of falsehood and violence which his idol had committed.

“leave the room, ellen!” she repeated, trembling all over.

little hareton, who followed me everywhere, and was sitting near me on
the floor, at seeing my tears commenced crying himself, and sobbed out
complaints against “wicked aunt cathy,” which drew her fury on to his
unlucky head: she seized his shoulders, and shook him till the poor
child waxed livid, and edgar thoughtlessly laid hold of her hands to
deliver him. in an instant one was wrung free, and the astonished young
man felt it applied over his own ear in a way that could not be
mistaken for jest. he drew back in consternation. i lifted hareton in
my arms, and walked off to the kitchen with him, leaving the door of
communication open, for i was curious to watch how they would settle
their disagreement. the insulted visitor moved to the spot where he had
laid his hat, pale and with a quivering lip.

“that’s right!” i said to myself. “take warning and begone! it’s a
kindness to let you have a glimpse of her genuine disposition.”

“where are you going?” demanded catherine, advancing to the door.

he swerved aside, and attempted to pass.

“you must not go!” she exclaimed, energetically.

“i must and shall!” he replied in a subdued voice.

“no,” she persisted, grasping the handle; “not yet, edgar linton: sit
down; you shall not leave me in that temper. i should be miserable all
night, and i won’t be miserable for you!”

“can i stay after you have struck me?” asked linton.

catherine was mute.

“you’ve made me afraid and ashamed of you,” he continued; “i’ll not
come here again!”

her eyes began to glisten and her lids to twinkle.

“and you told a deliberate untruth!” he said.

“i didn’t!” she cried, recovering her speech; “i did nothing
deliberately. well, go, if you please—get away! and now i’ll cry—i’ll
cry myself sick!”

she dropped down on her knees by a chair, and set to weeping in serious
earnest. edgar persevered in his resolution as far as the court; there
he lingered. i resolved to encourage him.

“miss is dreadfully wayward, sir,” i called out. “as bad as any marred
child: you’d better be riding home, or else she will be sick, only to
grieve us.”

the soft thing looked askance through the window: he possessed the
power to depart as much as a cat possesses the power to leave a mouse
half killed, or a bird half eaten. ah, i thought, there will be no
saving him: he’s doomed, and flies to his fate! and so it was: he
turned abruptly, hastened into the house again, shut the door behind
him; and when i went in a while after to inform them that earnshaw had
come home rabid drunk, ready to pull the whole place about our ears
(his ordinary frame of mind in that condition), i saw the quarrel had
merely effected a closer intimacy—had broken the outworks of youthful
timidity, and enabled them to forsake the disguise of friendship, and
confess themselves lovers.

intelligence of mr. hindley’s arrival drove linton speedily to his
horse, and catherine to her chamber. i went to hide little hareton, and
to take the shot out of the master’s fowling-piece, which he was fond
of playing with in his insane excitement, to the hazard of the lives of
any who provoked, or even attracted his notice too much; and i had hit
upon the plan of removing it, that he might do less mischief if he did
go the length of firing the gun.




chapter ix


he entered, vociferating oaths dreadful to hear; and caught me in the
act of stowing his son away in the kitchen cupboard. hareton was
impressed with a wholesome terror of encountering either his wild
beast’s fondness or his madman’s rage; for in one he ran a chance of
being squeezed and kissed to death, and in the other of being flung
into the fire, or dashed against the wall; and the poor thing remained
perfectly quiet wherever i chose to put him.

“there, i’ve found it out at last!” cried hindley, pulling me back by
the skin of my neck, like a dog. “by heaven and hell, you’ve sworn
between you to murder that child! i know how it is, now, that he is
always out of my way. but, with the help of satan, i shall make you
swallow the carving-knife, nelly! you needn’t laugh; for i’ve just
crammed kenneth, head-downmost, in the black-horse marsh; and two is
the same as one—and i want to kill some of you: i shall have no rest
till i do!”

“but i don’t like the carving-knife, mr. hindley,” i answered; “it has
been cutting red herrings. i’d rather be shot, if you please.”

“you’d rather be damned!” he said; “and so you shall. no law in england
can hinder a man from keeping his house decent, and mine’s abominable!
open your mouth.”

he held the knife in his hand, and pushed its point between my teeth:
but, for my part, i was never much afraid of his vagaries. i spat out,
and affirmed it tasted detestably—i would not take it on any account.

“oh!” said he, releasing me, “i see that hideous little villain is not
hareton: i beg your pardon, nell. if it be, he deserves flaying alive
for not running to welcome me, and for screaming as if i were a goblin.
unnatural cub, come hither! i’ll teach thee to impose on a
good-hearted, deluded father. now, don’t you think the lad would be
handsomer cropped? it makes a dog fiercer, and i love something
fierce—get me a scissors—something fierce and trim! besides, it’s
infernal affectation—devilish conceit it is, to cherish our ears—we’re
asses enough without them. hush, child, hush! well then, it is my
darling! wisht, dry thy eyes—there’s a joy; kiss me. what! it won’t?
kiss me, hareton! damn thee, kiss me! by god, as if i would rear such a
monster! as sure as i’m living, i’ll break the brat’s neck.”

poor hareton was squalling and kicking in his father’s arms with all
his might, and redoubled his yells when he carried him upstairs and
lifted him over the banister. i cried out that he would frighten the
child into fits, and ran to rescue him. as i reached them, hindley
leant forward on the rails to listen to a noise below; almost
forgetting what he had in his hands. “who is that?” he asked, hearing
some one approaching the stairs’-foot. i leant forward also, for the
purpose of signing to heathcliff, whose step i recognised, not to come
further; and, at the instant when my eye quitted hareton, he gave a
sudden spring, delivered himself from the careless grasp that held him,
and fell.

there was scarcely time to experience a thrill of horror before we saw
that the little wretch was safe. heathcliff arrived underneath just at
the critical moment; by a natural impulse he arrested his descent, and
setting him on his feet, looked up to discover the author of the
accident. a miser who has parted with a lucky lottery ticket for five
shillings, and finds next day he has lost in the bargain five thousand
pounds, could not show a blanker countenance than he did on beholding
the figure of mr. earnshaw above. it expressed, plainer than words
could do, the intensest anguish at having made himself the instrument
of thwarting his own revenge. had it been dark, i daresay he would have
tried to remedy the mistake by smashing hareton’s skull on the steps;
but, we witnessed his salvation; and i was presently below with my
precious charge pressed to my heart. hindley descended more leisurely,
sobered and abashed.

“it is your fault, ellen,” he said; “you should have kept him out of
sight: you should have taken him from me! is he injured anywhere?”

“injured!” i cried angrily; “if he is not killed, he’ll be an idiot!
oh! i wonder his mother does not rise from her grave to see how you use
him. you’re worse than a heathen—treating your own flesh and blood in
that manner!”

he attempted to touch the child, who, on finding himself with me,
sobbed off his terror directly. at the first finger his father laid on
him, however, he shrieked again louder than before, and struggled as if
he would go into convulsions.

“you shall not meddle with him!” i continued. “he hates you—they all
hate you—that’s the truth! a happy family you have; and a pretty state
you’re come to!”

“i shall come to a prettier, yet, nelly,” laughed the misguided man,
recovering his hardness. “at present, convey yourself and him away. and
hark you, heathcliff! clear you too quite from my reach and hearing. i
wouldn’t murder you to-night; unless, perhaps, i set the house on fire:
but that’s as my fancy goes.”

while saying this he took a pint bottle of brandy from the dresser, and
poured some into a tumbler.

“nay, don’t!” i entreated. “mr. hindley, do take warning. have mercy on
this unfortunate boy, if you care nothing for yourself!”

“any one will do better for him than i shall,” he answered.

“have mercy on your own soul!” i said, endeavouring to snatch the glass
from his hand.

“not i! on the contrary, i shall have great pleasure in sending it to
perdition to punish its maker,” exclaimed the blasphemer. “here’s to
its hearty damnation!”

he drank the spirits and impatiently bade us go; terminating his
command with a sequel of horrid imprecations too bad to repeat or
remember.

“it’s a pity he cannot kill himself with drink,” observed heathcliff,
muttering an echo of curses back when the door was shut. “he’s doing
his very utmost; but his constitution defies him. mr. kenneth says he
would wager his mare that he’ll outlive any man on this side gimmerton,
and go to the grave a hoary sinner; unless some happy chance out of the
common course befall him.”

i went into the kitchen, and sat down to lull my little lamb to sleep.
heathcliff, as i thought, walked through to the barn. it turned out
afterwards that he only got as far as the other side the settle, when
he flung himself on a bench by the wall, removed from the fire, and
remained silent.

i was rocking hareton on my knee, and humming a song that began,—

it was far in the night, and the bairnies grat,
the mither beneath the mools heard that,


when miss cathy, who had listened to the hubbub from her room, put her
head in, and whispered,—“are you alone, nelly?”

“yes, miss,” i replied.

she entered and approached the hearth. i, supposing she was going to
say something, looked up. the expression of her face seemed disturbed
and anxious. her lips were half asunder, as if she meant to speak, and
she drew a breath; but it escaped in a sigh instead of a sentence. i
resumed my song; not having forgotten her recent behaviour.

“where’s heathcliff?” she said, interrupting me.

“about his work in the stable,” was my answer.

he did not contradict me; perhaps he had fallen into a doze. there
followed another long pause, during which i perceived a drop or two
trickle from catherine’s cheek to the flags. is she sorry for her
shameful conduct?—i asked myself. that will be a novelty: but she may
come to the point as she will—i sha’n’t help her! no, she felt small
trouble regarding any subject, save her own concerns.

“oh, dear!” she cried at last. “i’m very unhappy!”

“a pity,” observed i. “you’re hard to please; so many friends and so
few cares, and can’t make yourself content!”

“nelly, will you keep a secret for me?” she pursued, kneeling down by
me, and lifting her winsome eyes to my face with that sort of look
which turns off bad temper, even when one has all the right in the
world to indulge it.

“is it worth keeping?” i inquired, less sulkily.

“yes, and it worries me, and i must let it out! i want to know what i
should do. to-day, edgar linton has asked me to marry him, and i’ve
given him an answer. now, before i tell you whether it was a consent or
denial, you tell me which it ought to have been.”

“really, miss catherine, how can i know?” i replied. “to be sure,
considering the exhibition you performed in his presence this
afternoon, i might say it would be wise to refuse him: since he asked
you after that, he must either be hopelessly stupid or a venturesome
fool.”

“if you talk so, i won’t tell you any more,” she returned, peevishly
rising to her feet. “i accepted him, nelly. be quick, and say whether i
was wrong!”

“you accepted him! then what good is it discussing the matter? you have
pledged your word, and cannot retract.”

“but say whether i should have done so—do!” she exclaimed in an
irritated tone; chafing her hands together, and frowning.

“there are many things to be considered before that question can be
answered properly,” i said, sententiously. “first and foremost, do you
love mr. edgar?”

“who can help it? of course i do,” she answered.

then i put her through the following catechism: for a girl of
twenty-two it was not injudicious.

“why do you love him, miss cathy?”

“nonsense, i do—that’s sufficient.”

“by no means; you must say why?”

“well, because he is handsome, and pleasant to be with.”

“bad!” was my commentary.

“and because he is young and cheerful.”

“bad, still.”

“and because he loves me.”

“indifferent, coming there.”

“and he will be rich, and i shall like to be the greatest woman of the
neighbourhood, and i shall be proud of having such a husband.”

“worst of all. and now, say how you love him?”

“as everybody loves—you’re silly, nelly.”

“not at all—answer.”

“i love the ground under his feet, and the air over his head, and
everything he touches, and every word he says. i love all his looks,
and all his actions, and him entirely and altogether. there now!”

“and why?”

“nay; you are making a jest of it: it is exceedingly ill-natured! it’s
no jest to me!” said the young lady, scowling, and turning her face to
the fire.

“i’m very far from jesting, miss catherine,” i replied. “you love mr.
edgar because he is handsome, and young, and cheerful, and rich, and
loves you. the last, however, goes for nothing: you would love him
without that, probably; and with it you wouldn’t, unless he possessed
the four former attractions.”

“no, to be sure not: i should only pity him—hate him, perhaps, if he
were ugly, and a clown.”

“but there are several other handsome, rich young men in the world:
handsomer, possibly, and richer than he is. what should hinder you from
loving them?”

“if there be any, they are out of my way: i’ve seen none like edgar.”

“you may see some; and he won’t always be handsome, and young, and may
not always be rich.”

“he is now; and i have only to do with the present. i wish you would
speak rationally.”

“well, that settles it: if you have only to do with the present, marry
mr. linton.”

“i don’t want your permission for that—i _shall_ marry him: and yet you
have not told me whether i’m right.”

“perfectly right; if people be right to marry only for the present. and
now, let us hear what you are unhappy about. your brother will be
pleased; the old lady and gentleman will not object, i think; you will
escape from a disorderly, comfortless home into a wealthy, respectable
one; and you love edgar, and edgar loves you. all seems smooth and
easy: where is the obstacle?”

“_here_! and _here_!” replied catherine, striking one hand on her
forehead, and the other on her breast: “in whichever place the soul
lives. in my soul and in my heart, i’m convinced i’m wrong!”

“that’s very strange! i cannot make it out.”

“it’s my secret. but if you will not mock at me, i’ll explain it: i
can’t do it distinctly; but i’ll give you a feeling of how i feel.”

she seated herself by me again: her countenance grew sadder and graver,
and her clasped hands trembled.

“nelly, do you never dream queer dreams?” she said, suddenly, after
some minutes’ reflection.

“yes, now and then,” i answered.

“and so do i. i’ve dreamt in my life dreams that have stayed with me
ever after, and changed my ideas: they’ve gone through and through me,
like wine through water, and altered the colour of my mind. and this is
one: i’m going to tell it—but take care not to smile at any part of
it.”

“oh! don’t, miss catherine!” i cried. “we’re dismal enough without
conjuring up ghosts and visions to perplex us. come, come, be merry and
like yourself! look at little hareton! _he’s_ dreaming nothing dreary.
how sweetly he smiles in his sleep!”

“yes; and how sweetly his father curses in his solitude! you remember
him, i daresay, when he was just such another as that chubby thing:
nearly as young and innocent. however, nelly, i shall oblige you to
listen: it’s not long; and i’ve no power to be merry to-night.”

“i won’t hear it, i won’t hear it!” i repeated, hastily.

i was superstitious about dreams then, and am still; and catherine had
an unusual gloom in her aspect, that made me dread something from which
i might shape a prophecy, and foresee a fearful catastrophe. she was
vexed, but she did not proceed. apparently taking up another subject,
she recommenced in a short time.

“if i were in heaven, nelly, i should be extremely miserable.”

“because you are not fit to go there,” i answered. “all sinners would
be miserable in heaven.”

“but it is not for that. i dreamt once that i was there.”

“i tell you i won’t hearken to your dreams, miss catherine! i’ll go to
bed,” i interrupted again.

she laughed, and held me down; for i made a motion to leave my chair.

“this is nothing,” cried she: “i was only going to say that heaven did
not seem to be my home; and i broke my heart with weeping to come back
to earth; and the angels were so angry that they flung me out into the
middle of the heath on the top of wuthering heights; where i woke
sobbing for joy. that will do to explain my secret, as well as the
other. i’ve no more business to marry edgar linton than i have to be in
heaven; and if the wicked man in there had not brought heathcliff so
low, i shouldn’t have thought of it. it would degrade me to marry
heathcliff now; so he shall never know how i love him: and that, not
because he’s handsome, nelly, but because he’s more myself than i am.
whatever our souls are made of, his and mine are the same; and linton’s
is as different as a moonbeam from lightning, or frost from fire.”

ere this speech ended i became sensible of heathcliff’s presence.
having noticed a slight movement, i turned my head, and saw him rise
from the bench, and steal out noiselessly. he had listened till he
heard catherine say it would degrade her to marry him, and then he
stayed to hear no further. my companion, sitting on the ground, was
prevented by the back of the settle from remarking his presence or
departure; but i started, and bade her hush!

“why?” she asked, gazing nervously round.

“joseph is here,” i answered, catching opportunely the roll of his
cartwheels up the road; “and heathcliff will come in with him. i’m not
sure whether he were not at the door this moment.”

“oh, he couldn’t overhear me at the door!” said she. “give me hareton,
while you get the supper, and when it is ready ask me to sup with you.
i want to cheat my uncomfortable conscience, and be convinced that
heathcliff has no notion of these things. he has not, has he? he does
not know what being in love is!”

“i see no reason that he should not know, as well as you,” i returned;
“and if _you_ are his choice, he’ll be the most unfortunate creature
that ever was born! as soon as you become mrs. linton, he loses friend,
and love, and all! have you considered how you’ll bear the separation,
and how he’ll bear to be quite deserted in the world? because, miss
catherine—”

“he quite deserted! we separated!” she exclaimed, with an accent of
indignation. “who is to separate us, pray? they’ll meet the fate of
milo! not as long as i live, ellen: for no mortal creature. every
linton on the face of the earth might melt into nothing before i could
consent to forsake heathcliff. oh, that’s not what i intend—that’s not
what i mean! i shouldn’t be mrs. linton were such a price demanded!
he’ll be as much to me as he has been all his lifetime. edgar must
shake off his antipathy, and tolerate him, at least. he will, when he
learns my true feelings towards him. nelly, i see now you think me a
selfish wretch; but did it never strike you that if heathcliff and i
married, we should be beggars? whereas, if i marry linton i can aid
heathcliff to rise, and place him out of my brother’s power.”

“with your husband’s money, miss catherine?” i asked. “you’ll find him
not so pliable as you calculate upon: and, though i’m hardly a judge, i
think that’s the worst motive you’ve given yet for being the wife of
young linton.”

“it is not,” retorted she; “it is the best! the others were the
satisfaction of my whims: and for edgar’s sake, too, to satisfy him.
this is for the sake of one who comprehends in his person my feelings
to edgar and myself. i cannot express it; but surely you and everybody
have a notion that there is or should be an existence of yours beyond
you. what were the use of my creation, if i were entirely contained
here? my great miseries in this world have been heathcliff’s miseries,
and i watched and felt each from the beginning: my great thought in
living is himself. if all else perished, and _he_ remained, _i_ should
still continue to be; and if all else remained, and he were
annihilated, the universe would turn to a mighty stranger: i should not
seem a part of it. my love for linton is like the foliage in the woods:
time will change it, i’m well aware, as winter changes the trees. my
love for heathcliff resembles the eternal rocks beneath: a source of
little visible delight, but necessary. nelly, i _am_ heathcliff! he’s
always, always in my mind: not as a pleasure, any more than i am always
a pleasure to myself, but as my own being. so don’t talk of our
separation again: it is impracticable; and—”

she paused, and hid her face in the folds of my gown; but i jerked it
forcibly away. i was out of patience with her folly!

“if i can make any sense of your nonsense, miss,” i said, “it only goes
to convince me that you are ignorant of the duties you undertake in
marrying; or else that you are a wicked, unprincipled girl. but trouble
me with no more secrets: i’ll not promise to keep them.”

“you’ll keep that?” she asked, eagerly.

“no, i’ll not promise,” i repeated.

she was about to insist, when the entrance of joseph finished our
conversation; and catherine removed her seat to a corner, and nursed
hareton, while i made the supper. after it was cooked, my
fellow-servant and i began to quarrel who should carry some to mr.
hindley; and we didn’t settle it till all was nearly cold. then we came
to the agreement that we would let him ask, if he wanted any; for we
feared particularly to go into his presence when he had been some time
alone.

“and how isn’t that nowt comed in fro’ th’ field, be this time? what is
he about? girt idle seeght!” demanded the old man, looking round for
heathcliff.

“i’ll call him,” i replied. “he’s in the barn, i’ve no doubt.”

i went and called, but got no answer. on returning, i whispered to
catherine that he had heard a good part of what she said, i was sure;
and told how i saw him quit the kitchen just as she complained of her
brother’s conduct regarding him. she jumped up in a fine fright, flung
hareton on to the settle, and ran to seek for her friend herself; not
taking leisure to consider why she was so flurried, or how her talk
would have affected him. she was absent such a while that joseph
proposed we should wait no longer. he cunningly conjectured they were
staying away in order to avoid hearing his protracted blessing. they
were “ill eneugh for ony fahl manners,” he affirmed. and on their
behalf he added that night a special prayer to the usual
quarter-of-an-hour’s supplication before meat, and would have tacked
another to the end of the grace, had not his young mistress broken in
upon him with a hurried command that he must run down the road, and,
wherever heathcliff had rambled, find and make him re-enter directly!

“i want to speak to him, and i _must_, before i go upstairs,” she said.
“and the gate is open: he is somewhere out of hearing; for he would not
reply, though i shouted at the top of the fold as loud as i could.”

joseph objected at first; she was too much in earnest, however, to
suffer contradiction; and at last he placed his hat on his head, and
walked grumbling forth. meantime, catherine paced up and down the
floor, exclaiming—“i wonder where he is—i wonder where he _can_ be!
what did i say, nelly? i’ve forgotten. was he vexed at my bad humour
this afternoon? dear! tell me what i’ve said to grieve him? i do wish
he’d come. i do wish he would!”

“what a noise for nothing!” i cried, though rather uneasy myself. “what
a trifle scares you! it’s surely no great cause of alarm that
heathcliff should take a moonlight saunter on the moors, or even lie
too sulky to speak to us in the hay-loft. i’ll engage he’s lurking
there. see if i don’t ferret him out!”

i departed to renew my search; its result was disappointment, and
joseph’s quest ended in the same.

“yon lad gets war und war!” observed he on re-entering. “he’s left th’
gate at t’ full swing, and miss’s pony has trodden dahn two rigs o’
corn, and plottered through, raight o’er into t’ meadow! hahsomdiver,
t’ maister ’ull play t’ devil to-morn, and he’ll do weel. he’s patience
itsseln wi’ sich careless, offald craters—patience itsseln he is! bud
he’ll not be soa allus—yah’s see, all on ye! yah mun’n’t drive him out
of his heead for nowt!”

“have you found heathcliff, you ass?” interrupted catherine. “have you
been looking for him, as i ordered?”

“i sud more likker look for th’ horse,” he replied. “it ’ud be to more
sense. bud i can look for norther horse nur man of a neeght loike
this—as black as t’ chimbley! und heathcliff’s noan t’ chap to coom at
_my_ whistle—happen he’ll be less hard o’ hearing wi’ _ye_!”

it _was_ a very dark evening for summer: the clouds appeared inclined
to thunder, and i said we had better all sit down; the approaching rain
would be certain to bring him home without further trouble. however,
catherine would not be persuaded into tranquillity. she kept wandering
to and fro, from the gate to the door, in a state of agitation which
permitted no repose; and at length took up a permanent situation on one
side of the wall, near the road: where, heedless of my expostulations
and the growling thunder, and the great drops that began to plash
around her, she remained, calling at intervals, and then listening, and
then crying outright. she beat hareton, or any child, at a good
passionate fit of crying.

about midnight, while we still sat up, the storm came rattling over the
heights in full fury. there was a violent wind, as well as thunder, and
either one or the other split a tree off at the corner of the building:
a huge bough fell across the roof, and knocked down a portion of the
east chimney-stack, sending a clatter of stones and soot into the
kitchen-fire. we thought a bolt had fallen in the middle of us; and
joseph swung on to his knees, beseeching the lord to remember the
patriarchs noah and lot, and, as in former times, spare the righteous,
though he smote the ungodly. i felt some sentiment that it must be a
judgment on us also. the jonah, in my mind, was mr. earnshaw; and i
shook the handle of his den that i might ascertain if he were yet
living. he replied audibly enough, in a fashion which made my companion
vociferate, more clamorously than before, that a wide distinction might
be drawn between saints like himself and sinners like his master. but
the uproar passed away in twenty minutes, leaving us all unharmed;
excepting cathy, who got thoroughly drenched for her obstinacy in
refusing to take shelter, and standing bonnetless and shawlless to
catch as much water as she could with her hair and clothes. she came in
and lay down on the settle, all soaked as she was, turning her face to
the back, and putting her hands before it.

“well, miss!” i exclaimed, touching her shoulder; “you are not bent on
getting your death, are you? do you know what o’clock it is? half-past
twelve. come, come to bed! there’s no use waiting any longer on that
foolish boy: he’ll be gone to gimmerton, and he’ll stay there now. he
guesses we shouldn’t wait for him till this late hour: at least, he
guesses that only mr. hindley would be up; and he’d rather avoid having
the door opened by the master.”

“nay, nay, he’s noan at gimmerton,” said joseph. “i’s niver wonder but
he’s at t’ bothom of a bog-hoile. this visitation worn’t for nowt, and
i wod hev’ ye to look out, miss—yah muh be t’ next. thank hivin for
all! all warks togither for gooid to them as is chozzen, and piked out
fro’ th’ rubbidge! yah knaw whet t’ scripture ses.” and he began
quoting several texts, referring us to chapters and verses where we
might find them.

i, having vainly begged the wilful girl to rise and remove her wet
things, left him preaching and her shivering, and betook myself to bed
with little hareton, who slept as fast as if everyone had been sleeping
round him. i heard joseph read on a while afterwards; then i
distinguished his slow step on the ladder, and then i dropped asleep.

coming down somewhat later than usual, i saw, by the sunbeams piercing
the chinks of the shutters, miss catherine still seated near the
fireplace. the house-door was ajar, too; light entered from its
unclosed windows; hindley had come out, and stood on the kitchen
hearth, haggard and drowsy.

“what ails you, cathy?” he was saying when i entered: “you look as
dismal as a drowned whelp. why are you so damp and pale, child?”

“i’ve been wet,” she answered reluctantly, “and i’m cold, that’s all.”

“oh, she is naughty!” i cried, perceiving the master to be tolerably
sober. “she got steeped in the shower of yesterday evening, and there
she has sat the night through, and i couldn’t prevail on her to stir.”

mr. earnshaw stared at us in surprise. “the night through,” he
repeated. “what kept her up? not fear of the thunder, surely? that was
over hours since.”

neither of us wished to mention heathcliff’s absence, as long as we
could conceal it; so i replied, i didn’t know how she took it into her
head to sit up; and she said nothing. the morning was fresh and cool; i
threw back the lattice, and presently the room filled with sweet scents
from the garden; but catherine called peevishly to me, “ellen, shut the
window. i’m starving!” and her teeth chattered as she shrank closer to
the almost extinguished embers.

“she’s ill,” said hindley, taking her wrist; “i suppose that’s the
reason she would not go to bed. damn it! i don’t want to be troubled
with more sickness here. what took you into the rain?”

“running after t’ lads, as usuald!” croaked joseph, catching an
opportunity from our hesitation to thrust in his evil tongue. “if i war
yah, maister, i’d just slam t’ boards i’ their faces all on ’em, gentle
and simple! never a day ut yah’re off, but yon cat o’ linton comes
sneaking hither; and miss nelly, shoo’s a fine lass! shoo sits watching
for ye i’ t’ kitchen; and as yah’re in at one door, he’s out at
t’other; and, then, wer grand lady goes a-courting of her side! it’s
bonny behaviour, lurking amang t’ fields, after twelve o’ t’ night, wi’
that fahl, flaysome divil of a gipsy, heathcliff! they think _i’m_
blind; but i’m noan: nowt ut t’ soart!—i seed young linton boath coming
and going, and i seed _yah_” (directing his discourse to me), “yah
gooid fur nowt, slattenly witch! nip up and bolt into th’ house, t’
minute yah heard t’ maister’s horse-fit clatter up t’ road.”

“silence, eavesdropper!” cried catherine; “none of your insolence
before me! edgar linton came yesterday by chance, hindley; and it was
_i_ who told him to be off: because i knew you would not like to have
met him as you were.”

“you lie, cathy, no doubt,” answered her brother, “and you are a
confounded simpleton! but never mind linton at present: tell me, were
you not with heathcliff last night? speak the truth, now. you need not
be afraid of harming him: though i hate him as much as ever, he did me
a good turn a short time since that will make my conscience tender of
breaking his neck. to prevent it, i shall send him about his business
this very morning; and after he’s gone, i’d advise you all to look
sharp: i shall only have the more humour for you.”

“i never saw heathcliff last night,” answered catherine, beginning to
sob bitterly: “and if you do turn him out of doors, i’ll go with him.
but, perhaps, you’ll never have an opportunity: perhaps, he’s gone.”
here she burst into uncontrollable grief, and the remainder of her
words were inarticulate.

hindley lavished on her a torrent of scornful abuse, and bade her get
to her room immediately, or she shouldn’t cry for nothing! i obliged
her to obey; and i shall never forget what a scene she acted when we
reached her chamber: it terrified me. i thought she was going mad, and
i begged joseph to run for the doctor. it proved the commencement of
delirium: mr. kenneth, as soon as he saw her, pronounced her
dangerously ill; she had a fever. he bled her, and he told me to let
her live on whey and water-gruel, and take care she did not throw
herself downstairs or out of the window; and then he left: for he had
enough to do in the parish, where two or three miles was the ordinary
distance between cottage and cottage.

though i cannot say i made a gentle nurse, and joseph and the master
were no better, and though our patient was as wearisome and headstrong
as a patient could be, she weathered it through. old mrs. linton paid
us several visits, to be sure, and set things to rights, and scolded
and ordered us all; and when catherine was convalescent, she insisted
on conveying her to thrushcross grange: for which deliverance we were
very grateful. but the poor dame had reason to repent of her kindness:
she and her husband both took the fever, and died within a few days of
each other.

our young lady returned to us saucier and more passionate, and
haughtier than ever. heathcliff had never been heard of since the
evening of the thunder-storm; and, one day, i had the misfortune, when
she had provoked me exceedingly, to lay the blame of his disappearance
on her: where indeed it belonged, as she well knew. from that period,
for several months, she ceased to hold any communication with me, save
in the relation of a mere servant. joseph fell under a ban also: he
_would_ speak his mind, and lecture her all the same as if she were a
little girl; and she esteemed herself a woman, and our mistress, and
thought that her recent illness gave her a claim to be treated with
consideration. then the doctor had said that she would not bear
crossing much; she ought to have her own way; and it was nothing less
than murder in her eyes for any one to presume to stand up and
contradict her. from mr. earnshaw and his companions she kept aloof;
and tutored by kenneth, and serious threats of a fit that often
attended her rages, her brother allowed her whatever she pleased to
demand, and generally avoided aggravating her fiery temper. he was
rather _too_ indulgent in humouring her caprices; not from affection,
but from pride: he wished earnestly to see her bring honour to the
family by an alliance with the lintons, and as long as she let him
alone she might trample on us like slaves, for aught he cared! edgar
linton, as multitudes have been before and will be after him, was
infatuated: and believed himself the happiest man alive on the day he
led her to gimmerton chapel, three years subsequent to his father’s
death.

much against my inclination, i was persuaded to leave wuthering heights
and accompany her here. little hareton was nearly five years old, and i
had just begun to teach him his letters. we made a sad parting; but
catherine’s tears were more powerful than ours. when i refused to go,
and when she found her entreaties did not move me, she went lamenting
to her husband and brother. the former offered me munificent wages; the
latter ordered me to pack up: he wanted no women in the house, he said,
now that there was no mistress; and as to hareton, the curate should
take him in hand, by-and-by. and so i had but one choice left: to do as
i was ordered. i told the master he got rid of all decent people only
to run to ruin a little faster; i kissed hareton, said good-by; and
since then he has been a stranger: and it’s very queer to think it, but
i’ve no doubt he has completely forgotten all about ellen dean, and
that he was ever more than all the world to her and she to him!

* * * * *


at this point of the housekeeper’s story she chanced to glance towards
the time-piece over the chimney; and was in amazement on seeing the
minute-hand measure half-past one. she would not hear of staying a
second longer: in truth, i felt rather disposed to defer the sequel of
her narrative myself. and now that she is vanished to her rest, and i
have meditated for another hour or two, i shall summon courage to go
also, in spite of aching laziness of head and limbs.




chapter x


a charming introduction to a hermit’s life! four weeks’ torture,
tossing, and sickness! oh, these bleak winds and bitter northern skies,
and impassable roads, and dilatory country surgeons! and oh, this
dearth of the human physiognomy! and, worse than all, the terrible
intimation of kenneth that i need not expect to be out of doors till
spring!

mr. heathcliff has just honoured me with a call. about seven days ago
he sent me a brace of grouse—the last of the season. scoundrel! he is
not altogether guiltless in this illness of mine; and that i had a
great mind to tell him. but, alas! how could i offend a man who was
charitable enough to sit at my bedside a good hour, and talk on some
other subject than pills and draughts, blisters and leeches? this is
quite an easy interval. i am too weak to read; yet i feel as if i could
enjoy something interesting. why not have up mrs. dean to finish her
tale? i can recollect its chief incidents, as far as she had gone. yes:
i remember her hero had run off, and never been heard of for three
years; and the heroine was married. i’ll ring: she’ll be delighted to
find me capable of talking cheerfully. mrs. dean came.

“it wants twenty minutes, sir, to taking the medicine,” she commenced.

“away, away with it!” i replied; “i desire to have—”

“the doctor says you must drop the powders.”

“with all my heart! don’t interrupt me. come and take your seat here.
keep your fingers from that bitter phalanx of vials. draw your knitting
out of your pocket—that will do—now continue the history of mr.
heathcliff, from where you left off, to the present day. did he finish
his education on the continent, and come back a gentleman? or did he
get a sizar’s place at college, or escape to america, and earn honours
by drawing blood from his foster-country? or make a fortune more
promptly on the english highways?”

“he may have done a little in all these vocations, mr. lockwood; but i
couldn’t give my word for any. i stated before that i didn’t know how
he gained his money; neither am i aware of the means he took to raise
his mind from the savage ignorance into which it was sunk: but, with
your leave, i’ll proceed in my own fashion, if you think it will amuse
and not weary you. are you feeling better this morning?”

“much.”

“that’s good news.”

* * * * *


i got miss catherine and myself to thrushcross grange; and, to my
agreeable disappointment, she behaved infinitely better than i dared to
expect. she seemed almost over-fond of mr. linton; and even to his
sister she showed plenty of affection. they were both very attentive to
her comfort, certainly. it was not the thorn bending to the
honeysuckles, but the honeysuckles embracing the thorn. there were no
mutual concessions: one stood erect, and the others yielded: and who
_can_ be ill-natured and bad-tempered when they encounter neither
opposition nor indifference? i observed that mr. edgar had a
deep-rooted fear of ruffling her humour. he concealed it from her; but
if ever he heard me answer sharply, or saw any other servant grow
cloudy at some imperious order of hers, he would show his trouble by a
frown of displeasure that never darkened on his own account. he many a
time spoke sternly to me about my pertness; and averred that the stab
of a knife could not inflict a worse pang than he suffered at seeing
his lady vexed. not to grieve a kind master, i learned to be less
touchy; and, for the space of half a year, the gunpowder lay as
harmless as sand, because no fire came near to explode it. catherine
had seasons of gloom and silence now and then: they were respected with
sympathising silence by her husband, who ascribed them to an alteration
in her constitution, produced by her perilous illness; as she was never
subject to depression of spirits before. the return of sunshine was
welcomed by answering sunshine from him. i believe i may assert that
they were really in possession of deep and growing happiness.

it ended. well, we _must_ be for ourselves in the long run; the mild
and generous are only more justly selfish than the domineering; and it
ended when circumstances caused each to feel that the one’s interest
was not the chief consideration in the other’s thoughts. on a mellow
evening in september, i was coming from the garden with a heavy basket
of apples which i had been gathering. it had got dusk, and the moon
looked over the high wall of the court, causing undefined shadows to
lurk in the corners of the numerous projecting portions of the
building. i set my burden on the house-steps by the kitchen-door, and
lingered to rest, and drew in a few more breaths of the soft, sweet
air; my eyes were on the moon, and my back to the entrance, when i
heard a voice behind me say,—“nelly, is that you?”

it was a deep voice, and foreign in tone; yet there was something in
the manner of pronouncing my name which made it sound familiar. i
turned about to discover who spoke, fearfully; for the doors were shut,
and i had seen nobody on approaching the steps. something stirred in
the porch; and, moving nearer, i distinguished a tall man dressed in
dark clothes, with dark face and hair. he leant against the side, and
held his fingers on the latch as if intending to open for himself. “who
can it be?” i thought. “mr. earnshaw? oh, no! the voice has no
resemblance to his.”

“i have waited here an hour,” he resumed, while i continued staring;
“and the whole of that time all round has been as still as death. i
dared not enter. you do not know me? look, i’m not a stranger!”

a ray fell on his features; the cheeks were sallow, and half covered
with black whiskers; the brows lowering, the eyes deep-set and
singular. i remembered the eyes.

“what!” i cried, uncertain whether to regard him as a worldly visitor,
and i raised my hands in amazement. “what! you come back? is it really
you? is it?”

“yes, heathcliff,” he replied, glancing from me up to the windows,
which reflected a score of glittering moons, but showed no lights from
within. “are they at home? where is she? nelly, you are not glad! you
needn’t be so disturbed. is she here? speak! i want to have one word
with her—your mistress. go, and say some person from gimmerton desires
to see her.”

“how will she take it?” i exclaimed. “what will she do? the surprise
bewilders me—it will put her out of her head! and you _are_ heathcliff!
but altered! nay, there’s no comprehending it. have you been for a
soldier?”

“go and carry my message,” he interrupted, impatiently. “i’m in hell
till you do!”

he lifted the latch, and i entered; but when i got to the parlour where
mr. and mrs. linton were, i could not persuade myself to proceed. at
length i resolved on making an excuse to ask if they would have the
candles lighted, and i opened the door.

they sat together in a window whose lattice lay back against the wall,
and displayed, beyond the garden trees, and the wild green park, the
valley of gimmerton, with a long line of mist winding nearly to its top
(for very soon after you pass the chapel, as you may have noticed, the
sough that runs from the marshes joins a beck which follows the bend of
the glen). wuthering heights rose above this silvery vapour; but our
old house was invisible; it rather dips down on the other side. both
the room and its occupants, and the scene they gazed on, looked
wondrously peaceful. i shrank reluctantly from performing my errand;
and was actually going away leaving it unsaid, after having put my
question about the candles, when a sense of my folly compelled me to
return, and mutter, “a person from gimmerton wishes to see you ma’am.”

“what does he want?” asked mrs. linton.

“i did not question him,” i answered.

“well, close the curtains, nelly,” she said; “and bring up tea. i’ll be
back again directly.”

she quitted the apartment; mr. edgar inquired, carelessly, who it was.

“some one mistress does not expect,” i replied. “that heathcliff—you
recollect him, sir—who used to live at mr. earnshaw’s.”

“what! the gipsy—the ploughboy?” he cried. “why did you not say so to
catherine?”

“hush! you must not call him by those names, master,” i said. “she’d be
sadly grieved to hear you. she was nearly heartbroken when he ran off.
i guess his return will make a jubilee to her.”

mr. linton walked to a window on the other side of the room that
overlooked the court. he unfastened it, and leant out. i suppose they
were below, for he exclaimed quickly: “don’t stand there, love! bring
the person in, if it be anyone particular.” ere long, i heard the click
of the latch, and catherine flew upstairs, breathless and wild; too
excited to show gladness: indeed, by her face, you would rather have
surmised an awful calamity.

“oh, edgar, edgar!” she panted, flinging her arms round his neck. “oh,
edgar darling! heathcliff’s come back—he is!” and she tightened her
embrace to a squeeze.

“well, well,” cried her husband, crossly, “don’t strangle me for that!
he never struck me as such a marvellous treasure. there is no need to
be frantic!”

“i know you didn’t like him,” she answered, repressing a little the
intensity of her delight. “yet, for my sake, you must be friends now.
shall i tell him to come up?”

“here,” he said, “into the parlour?”

“where else?” she asked.

he looked vexed, and suggested the kitchen as a more suitable place for
him. mrs. linton eyed him with a droll expression—half angry, half
laughing at his fastidiousness.

“no,” she added, after a while; “i cannot sit in the kitchen. set two
tables here, ellen: one for your master and miss isabella, being
gentry; the other for heathcliff and myself, being of the lower orders.
will that please you, dear? or must i have a fire lighted elsewhere? if
so, give directions. i’ll run down and secure my guest. i’m afraid the
joy is too great to be real!”

she was about to dart off again; but edgar arrested her.

“_you_ bid him step up,” he said, addressing me; “and, catherine, try
to be glad, without being absurd. the whole household need not witness
the sight of your welcoming a runaway servant as a brother.”

i descended, and found heathcliff waiting under the porch, evidently
anticipating an invitation to enter. he followed my guidance without
waste of words, and i ushered him into the presence of the master and
mistress, whose flushed cheeks betrayed signs of warm talking. but the
lady’s glowed with another feeling when her friend appeared at the
door: she sprang forward, took both his hands, and led him to linton;
and then she seized linton’s reluctant fingers and crushed them into
his. now, fully revealed by the fire and candlelight, i was amazed,
more than ever, to behold the transformation of heathcliff. he had
grown a tall, athletic, well-formed man; beside whom my master seemed
quite slender and youth-like. his upright carriage suggested the idea
of his having been in the army. his countenance was much older in
expression and decision of feature than mr. linton’s; it looked
intelligent, and retained no marks of former degradation. a
half-civilised ferocity lurked yet in the depressed brows and eyes full
of black fire, but it was subdued; and his manner was even dignified:
quite divested of roughness, though too stern for grace. my master’s
surprise equalled or exceeded mine: he remained for a minute at a loss
how to address the ploughboy, as he had called him. heathcliff dropped
his slight hand, and stood looking at him coolly till he chose to
speak.

“sit down, sir,” he said, at length. “mrs. linton, recalling old times,
would have me give you a cordial reception; and, of course, i am
gratified when anything occurs to please her.”

“and i also,” answered heathcliff, “especially if it be anything in
which i have a part. i shall stay an hour or two willingly.”

he took a seat opposite catherine, who kept her gaze fixed on him as if
she feared he would vanish were she to remove it. he did not raise his
to her often: a quick glance now and then sufficed; but it flashed
back, each time more confidently, the undisguised delight he drank from
hers. they were too much absorbed in their mutual joy to suffer
embarrassment. not so mr. edgar: he grew pale with pure annoyance: a
feeling that reached its climax when his lady rose, and stepping across
the rug, seized heathcliff’s hands again, and laughed like one beside
herself.

“i shall think it a dream to-morrow!” she cried. “i shall not be able
to believe that i have seen, and touched, and spoken to you once more.
and yet, cruel heathcliff! you don’t deserve this welcome. to be absent
and silent for three years, and never to think of me!”

“a little more than you have thought of me,” he murmured. “i heard of
your marriage, cathy, not long since; and, while waiting in the yard
below, i meditated this plan—just to have one glimpse of your face, a
stare of surprise, perhaps, and pretended pleasure; afterwards settle
my score with hindley; and then prevent the law by doing execution on
myself. your welcome has put these ideas out of my mind; but beware of
meeting me with another aspect next time! nay, you’ll not drive me off
again. you were really sorry for me, were you? well, there was cause.
i’ve fought through a bitter life since i last heard your voice; and
you must forgive me, for i struggled only for you!”

“catherine, unless we are to have cold tea, please to come to the
table,” interrupted linton, striving to preserve his ordinary tone, and
a due measure of politeness. “mr. heathcliff will have a long walk,
wherever he may lodge to-night; and i’m thirsty.”

she took her post before the urn; and miss isabella came, summoned by
the bell; then, having handed their chairs forward, i left the room.
the meal hardly endured ten minutes. catherine’s cup was never filled:
she could neither eat nor drink. edgar had made a slop in his saucer,
and scarcely swallowed a mouthful. their guest did not protract his
stay that evening above an hour longer. i asked, as he departed, if he
went to gimmerton?

“no, to wuthering heights,” he answered: “mr. earnshaw invited me, when
i called this morning.”

mr. earnshaw invited _him_! and _he_ called on mr. earnshaw! i pondered
this sentence painfully, after he was gone. is he turning out a bit of
a hypocrite, and coming into the country to work mischief under a
cloak? i mused: i had a presentiment in the bottom of my heart that he
had better have remained away.

about the middle of the night, i was wakened from my first nap by mrs.
linton gliding into my chamber, taking a seat on my bedside, and
pulling me by the hair to rouse me.

“i cannot rest, ellen,” she said, by way of apology. “and i want some
living creature to keep me company in my happiness! edgar is sulky,
because i’m glad of a thing that does not interest him: he refuses to
open his mouth, except to utter pettish, silly speeches; and he
affirmed i was cruel and selfish for wishing to talk when he was so
sick and sleepy. he always contrives to be sick at the least cross! i
gave a few sentences of commendation to heathcliff, and he, either for
a headache or a pang of envy, began to cry: so i got up and left him.”

“what use is it praising heathcliff to him?” i answered. “as lads they
had an aversion to each other, and heathcliff would hate just as much
to hear him praised: it’s human nature. let mr. linton alone about him,
unless you would like an open quarrel between them.”

“but does it not show great weakness?” pursued she. “i’m not envious: i
never feel hurt at the brightness of isabella’s yellow hair and the
whiteness of her skin, at her dainty elegance, and the fondness all the
family exhibit for her. even you, nelly, if we have a dispute
sometimes, you back isabella at once; and i yield like a foolish
mother: i call her a darling, and flatter her into a good temper. it
pleases her brother to see us cordial, and that pleases me. but they
are very much alike: they are spoiled children, and fancy the world was
made for their accommodation; and though i humour both, i think a smart
chastisement might improve them all the same.”

“you’re mistaken, mrs. linton,” said i. “they humour you: i know what
there would be to do if they did not. you can well afford to indulge
their passing whims as long as their business is to anticipate all your
desires. you may, however, fall out, at last, over something of equal
consequence to both sides; and then those you term weak are very
capable of being as obstinate as you.”

“and then we shall fight to the death, sha’n’t we, nelly?” she
returned, laughing. “no! i tell you, i have such faith in linton’s
love, that i believe i might kill him, and he wouldn’t wish to
retaliate.”

i advised her to value him the more for his affection.

“i do,” she answered, “but he needn’t resort to whining for trifles. it
is childish; and, instead of melting into tears because i said that
heathcliff was now worthy of anyone’s regard, and it would honour the
first gentleman in the country to be his friend, he ought to have said
it for me, and been delighted from sympathy. he must get accustomed to
him, and he may as well like him: considering how heathcliff has reason
to object to him, i’m sure he behaved excellently!”

“what do you think of his going to wuthering heights?” i inquired. “he
is reformed in every respect, apparently: quite a christian: offering
the right hand of fellowship to his enemies all around!”

“he explained it,” she replied. “i wonder as much as you. he said he
called to gather information concerning me from you, supposing you
resided there still; and joseph told hindley, who came out and fell to
questioning him of what he had been doing, and how he had been living;
and finally, desired him to walk in. there were some persons sitting at
cards; heathcliff joined them; my brother lost some money to him, and,
finding him plentifully supplied, he requested that he would come again
in the evening: to which he consented. hindley is too reckless to
select his acquaintance prudently: he doesn’t trouble himself to
reflect on the causes he might have for mistrusting one whom he has
basely injured. but heathcliff affirms his principal reason for
resuming a connection with his ancient persecutor is a wish to install
himself in quarters at walking distance from the grange, and an
attachment to the house where we lived together; and likewise a hope
that i shall have more opportunities of seeing him there than i could
have if he settled in gimmerton. he means to offer liberal payment for
permission to lodge at the heights; and doubtless my brother’s
covetousness will prompt him to accept the terms: he was always greedy;
though what he grasps with one hand he flings away with the other.”

“it’s a nice place for a young man to fix his dwelling in!” said i.
“have you no fear of the consequences, mrs. linton?”

“none for my friend,” she replied: “his strong head will keep him from
danger; a little for hindley: but he can’t be made morally worse than
he is; and i stand between him and bodily harm. the event of this
evening has reconciled me to god and humanity! i had risen in angry
rebellion against providence. oh, i’ve endured very, very bitter
misery, nelly! if that creature knew how bitter, he’d be ashamed to
cloud its removal with idle petulance. it was kindness for him which
induced me to bear it alone: had i expressed the agony i frequently
felt, he would have been taught to long for its alleviation as ardently
as i. however, it’s over, and i’ll take no revenge on his folly; i can
afford to suffer anything hereafter! should the meanest thing alive
slap me on the cheek, i’d not only turn the other, but i’d ask pardon
for provoking it; and, as a proof, i’ll go make my peace with edgar
instantly. good-night! i’m an angel!”

in this self-complacent conviction she departed; and the success of her
fulfilled resolution was obvious on the morrow: mr. linton had not only
abjured his peevishness (though his spirits seemed still subdued by
catherine’s exuberance of vivacity), but he ventured no objection to
her taking isabella with her to wuthering heights in the afternoon; and
she rewarded him with such a summer of sweetness and affection in
return as made the house a paradise for several days; both master and
servants profiting from the perpetual sunshine.

heathcliff—mr. heathcliff i should say in future—used the liberty of
visiting at thrushcross grange cautiously, at first: he seemed
estimating how far its owner would bear his intrusion. catherine, also,
deemed it judicious to moderate her expressions of pleasure in
receiving him; and he gradually established his right to be expected.
he retained a great deal of the reserve for which his boyhood was
remarkable; and that served to repress all startling demonstrations of
feeling. my master’s uneasiness experienced a lull, and further
circumstances diverted it into another channel for a space.

his new source of trouble sprang from the not anticipated misfortune of
isabella linton evincing a sudden and irresistible attraction towards
the tolerated guest. she was at that time a charming young lady of
eighteen; infantile in manners, though possessed of keen wit, keen
feelings, and a keen temper, too, if irritated. her brother, who loved
her tenderly, was appalled at this fantastic preference. leaving aside
the degradation of an alliance with a nameless man, and the possible
fact that his property, in default of heirs male, might pass into such
a one’s power, he had sense to comprehend heathcliff’s disposition: to
know that, though his exterior was altered, his mind was unchangeable
and unchanged. and he dreaded that mind: it revolted him: he shrank
forebodingly from the idea of committing isabella to its keeping. he
would have recoiled still more had he been aware that her attachment
rose unsolicited, and was bestowed where it awakened no reciprocation
of sentiment; for the minute he discovered its existence he laid the
blame on heathcliff’s deliberate designing.

we had all remarked, during some time, that miss linton fretted and
pined over something. she grew cross and wearisome; snapping at and
teasing catherine continually, at the imminent risk of exhausting her
limited patience. we excused her, to a certain extent, on the plea of
ill-health: she was dwindling and fading before our eyes. but one day,
when she had been peculiarly wayward, rejecting her breakfast,
complaining that the servants did not do what she told them; that the
mistress would allow her to be nothing in the house, and edgar
neglected her; that she had caught a cold with the doors being left
open, and we let the parlour fire go out on purpose to vex her, with a
hundred yet more frivolous accusations, mrs. linton peremptorily
insisted that she should get to bed; and, having scolded her heartily,
threatened to send for the doctor. mention of kenneth caused her to
exclaim, instantly, that her health was perfect, and it was only
catherine’s harshness which made her unhappy.

“how can you say i am harsh, you naughty fondling?” cried the mistress,
amazed at the unreasonable assertion. “you are surely losing your
reason. when have i been harsh, tell me?”

“yesterday,” sobbed isabella, “and now!”

“yesterday!” said her sister-in-law. “on what occasion?”

“in our walk along the moor: you told me to ramble where i pleased,
while you sauntered on with mr. heathcliff!”

“and that’s your notion of harshness?” said catherine, laughing. “it
was no hint that your company was superfluous; we didn’t care whether
you kept with us or not; i merely thought heathcliff’s talk would have
nothing entertaining for your ears.”

“oh, no,” wept the young lady; “you wished me away, because you knew i
liked to be there!”

“is she sane?” asked mrs. linton, appealing to me. “i’ll repeat our
conversation, word for word, isabella; and you point out any charm it
could have had for you.”

“i don’t mind the conversation,” she answered: “i wanted to be with—”

“well?” said catherine, perceiving her hesitate to complete the
sentence.

“with him: and i won’t be always sent off!” she continued, kindling up.
“you are a dog in the manger, cathy, and desire no one to be loved but
yourself!”

“you are an impertinent little monkey!” exclaimed mrs. linton, in
surprise. “but i’ll not believe this idiocy! it is impossible that you
can covet the admiration of heathcliff—that you consider him an
agreeable person! i hope i have misunderstood you, isabella?”

“no, you have not,” said the infatuated girl. “i love him more than
ever you loved edgar, and he might love me, if you would let him!”

“i wouldn’t be you for a kingdom, then!” catherine declared,
emphatically: and she seemed to speak sincerely. “nelly, help me to
convince her of her madness. tell her what heathcliff is: an
unreclaimed creature, without refinement, without cultivation; an arid
wilderness of furze and whinstone. i’d as soon put that little canary
into the park on a winter’s day, as recommend you to bestow your heart
on him! it is deplorable ignorance of his character, child, and nothing
else, which makes that dream enter your head. pray, don’t imagine that
he conceals depths of benevolence and affection beneath a stern
exterior! he’s not a rough diamond—a pearl-containing oyster of a
rustic: he’s a fierce, pitiless, wolfish man. i never say to him, ‘let
this or that enemy alone, because it would be ungenerous or cruel to
harm them;’ i say, ‘let them alone, because _i_ should hate them to be
wronged:’ and he’d crush you like a sparrow’s egg, isabella, if he
found you a troublesome charge. i know he couldn’t love a linton; and
yet he’d be quite capable of marrying your fortune and expectations:
avarice is growing with him a besetting sin. there’s my picture: and
i’m his friend—so much so, that had he thought seriously to catch you,
i should, perhaps, have held my tongue, and let you fall into his
trap.”

miss linton regarded her sister-in-law with indignation.

“for shame! for shame!” she repeated, angrily. “you are worse than
twenty foes, you poisonous friend!”

“ah! you won’t believe me, then?” said catherine. “you think i speak
from wicked selfishness?”

“i’m certain you do,” retorted isabella; “and i shudder at you!”

“good!” cried the other. “try for yourself, if that be your spirit: i
have done, and yield the argument to your saucy insolence.”—

“and i must suffer for her egotism!” she sobbed, as mrs. linton left
the room. “all, all is against me: she has blighted my single
consolation. but she uttered falsehoods, didn’t she? mr. heathcliff is
not a fiend: he has an honourable soul, and a true one, or how could he
remember her?”

“banish him from your thoughts, miss,” i said. “he’s a bird of bad
omen: no mate for you. mrs. linton spoke strongly, and yet i can’t
contradict her. she is better acquainted with his heart than i, or any
one besides; and she never would represent him as worse than he is.
honest people don’t hide their deeds. how has he been living? how has
he got rich? why is he staying at wuthering heights, the house of a man
whom he abhors? they say mr. earnshaw is worse and worse since he came.
they sit up all night together continually, and hindley has been
borrowing money on his land, and does nothing but play and drink: i
heard only a week ago—it was joseph who told me—i met him at gimmerton:
‘nelly,’ he said, ‘we’s hae a crowner’s ’quest enow, at ahr folks’. one
on ’em ’s a’most getten his finger cut off wi’ hauding t’ other fro’
stickin’ hisseln loike a cawlf. that’s maister, yah knaw, ’at ’s soa
up o’ going tuh t’ grand ’sizes. he’s noan feared o’ t’ bench o’
judges, norther paul, nur peter, nur john, nur matthew, nor noan on
’em, not he! he fair likes—he langs to set his brazened face agean ’em!
and yon bonny lad heathcliff, yah mind, he’s a rare ’un. he can girn a
laugh as well ’s onybody at a raight divil’s jest. does he niver say
nowt of his fine living amang us, when he goes to t’ grange? this is t’
way on ’t:—up at sun-down: dice, brandy, cloised shutters, und
can’le-light till next day at noon: then, t’ fooil gangs banning un
raving to his cham’er, makking dacent fowks dig thur fingers i’ thur
lugs fur varry shame; un’ the knave, why he can caint his brass, un’
ate, un’ sleep, un’ off to his neighbour’s to gossip wi’ t’ wife. i’
course, he tells dame catherine how her fathur’s goold runs into his
pocket, and her fathur’s son gallops down t’ broad road, while he flees
afore to oppen t’ pikes!’ now, miss linton, joseph is an old rascal,
but no liar; and, if his account of heathcliff’s conduct be true, you
would never think of desiring such a husband, would you?”

“you are leagued with the rest, ellen!” she replied. “i’ll not listen
to your slanders. what malevolence you must have to wish to convince me
that there is no happiness in the world!”

whether she would have got over this fancy if left to herself, or
persevered in nursing it perpetually, i cannot say: she had little time
to reflect. the day after, there was a justice-meeting at the next
town; my master was obliged to attend; and mr. heathcliff, aware of his
absence, called rather earlier than usual. catherine and isabella were
sitting in the library, on hostile terms, but silent: the latter
alarmed at her recent indiscretion, and the disclosure she had made of
her secret feelings in a transient fit of passion; the former, on
mature consideration, really offended with her companion; and, if she
laughed again at her pertness, inclined to make it no laughing matter
to _her_. she did laugh as she saw heathcliff pass the window. i was
sweeping the hearth, and i noticed a mischievous smile on her lips.
isabella, absorbed in her meditations, or a book, remained till the
door opened; and it was too late to attempt an escape, which she would
gladly have done had it been practicable.

“come in, that’s right!” exclaimed the mistress, gaily, pulling a chair
to the fire. “here are two people sadly in need of a third to thaw the
ice between them; and you are the very one we should both of us choose.
heathcliff, i’m proud to show you, at last, somebody that dotes on you
more than myself. i expect you to feel flattered. nay, it’s not nelly;
don’t look at her! my poor little sister-in-law is breaking her heart
by mere contemplation of your physical and moral beauty. it lies in
your own power to be edgar’s brother! no, no, isabella, you sha’n’t run
off,” she continued, arresting, with feigned playfulness, the
confounded girl, who had risen indignantly. “we were quarrelling like
cats about you, heathcliff; and i was fairly beaten in protestations of
devotion and admiration: and, moreover, i was informed that if i would
but have the manners to stand aside, my rival, as she will have herself
to be, would shoot a shaft into your soul that would fix you for ever,
and send my image into eternal oblivion!”

“catherine!” said isabella, calling up her dignity, and disdaining to
struggle from the tight grasp that held her, “i’d thank you to adhere
to the truth and not slander me, even in joke! mr. heathcliff, be kind
enough to bid this friend of yours release me: she forgets that you and
i are not intimate acquaintances; and what amuses her is painful to me
beyond expression.”

as the guest answered nothing, but took his seat, and looked thoroughly
indifferent what sentiments she cherished concerning him, she turned
and whispered an earnest appeal for liberty to her tormentor.

“by no means!” cried mrs. linton in answer. “i won’t be named a dog in
the manger again. you _shall_ stay: now then! heathcliff, why don’t you
evince satisfaction at my pleasant news? isabella swears that the love
edgar has for me is nothing to that she entertains for you. i’m sure
she made some speech of the kind; did she not, ellen? and she has
fasted ever since the day before yesterday’s walk, from sorrow and rage
that i despatched her out of your society under the idea of its being
unacceptable.”

“i think you belie her,” said heathcliff, twisting his chair to face
them. “she wishes to be out of my society now, at any rate!”

and he stared hard at the object of discourse, as one might do at a
strange repulsive animal: a centipede from the indies, for instance,
which curiosity leads one to examine in spite of the aversion it
raises. the poor thing couldn’t bear that; she grew white and red in
rapid succession, and, while tears beaded her lashes, bent the strength
of her small fingers to loosen the firm clutch of catherine; and
perceiving that as fast as she raised one finger off her arm another
closed down, and she could not remove the whole together, she began to
make use of her nails; and their sharpness presently ornamented the
detainer’s with crescents of red.

“there’s a tigress!” exclaimed mrs. linton, setting her free, and
shaking her hand with pain. “begone, for god’s sake, and hide your
vixen face! how foolish to reveal those talons to _him_. can’t you
fancy the conclusions he’ll draw? look, heathcliff! they are
instruments that will do execution—you must beware of your eyes.”

“i’d wrench them off her fingers, if they ever menaced me,” he
answered, brutally, when the door had closed after her. “but what did
you mean by teasing the creature in that manner, cathy? you were not
speaking the truth, were you?”

“i assure you i was,” she returned. “she has been dying for your sake
several weeks, and raving about you this morning, and pouring forth a
deluge of abuse, because i represented your failings in a plain light,
for the purpose of mitigating her adoration. but don’t notice it
further: i wished to punish her sauciness, that’s all. i like her too
well, my dear heathcliff, to let you absolutely seize and devour her
up.”

“and i like her too ill to attempt it,” said he, “except in a very
ghoulish fashion. you’d hear of odd things if i lived alone with that
mawkish, waxen face: the most ordinary would be painting on its white
the colours of the rainbow, and turning the blue eyes black, every day
or two: they detestably resemble linton’s.”

“delectably!” observed catherine. “they are dove’s eyes—angel’s!”

“she’s her brother’s heir, is she not?” he asked, after a brief
silence.

“i should be sorry to think so,” returned his companion. “half a dozen
nephews shall erase her title, please heaven! abstract your mind from
the subject at present: you are too prone to covet your neighbour’s
goods; remember _this_ neighbour’s goods are mine.”

“if they were _mine_, they would be none the less that,” said
heathcliff; “but though isabella linton may be silly, she is scarcely
mad; and, in short, we’ll dismiss the matter, as you advise.”

from their tongues they did dismiss it; and catherine, probably, from
her thoughts. the other, i felt certain, recalled it often in the
course of the evening. i saw him smile to himself—grin rather—and lapse
into ominous musing whenever mrs. linton had occasion to be absent from
the apartment.

i determined to watch his movements. my heart invariably cleaved to the
master’s, in preference to catherine’s side: with reason i imagined,
for he was kind, and trustful, and honourable; and she—she could not be
called the _opposite_, yet she seemed to allow herself such wide
latitude, that i had little faith in her principles, and still less
sympathy for her feelings. i wanted something to happen which might
have the effect of freeing both wuthering heights and the grange of mr.
heathcliff, quietly; leaving us as we had been prior to his advent. his
visits were a continual nightmare to me; and, i suspected, to my master
also. his abode at the heights was an oppression past explaining. i
felt that god had forsaken the stray sheep there to its own wicked
wanderings, and an evil beast prowled between it and the fold, waiting
his time to spring and destroy.




chapter xi


sometimes, while meditating on these things in solitude, i’ve got up in
a sudden terror, and put on my bonnet to go see how all was at the
farm. i’ve persuaded my conscience that it was a duty to warn him how
people talked regarding his ways; and then i’ve recollected his
confirmed bad habits, and, hopeless of benefiting him, have flinched
from re-entering the dismal house, doubting if i could bear to be taken
at my word.

one time i passed the old gate, going out of my way, on a journey to
gimmerton. it was about the period that my narrative has reached: a
bright frosty afternoon; the ground bare, and the road hard and dry. i
came to a stone where the highway branches off on to the moor at your
left hand; a rough sand-pillar, with the letters w. h. cut on its north
side, on the east, g., and on the south-west, t. g. it serves as a
guide-post to the grange, the heights, and village. the sun shone
yellow on its grey head, reminding me of summer; and i cannot say why,
but all at once a gush of child’s sensations flowed into my heart.
hindley and i held it a favourite spot twenty years before. i gazed
long at the weather-worn block; and, stooping down, perceived a hole
near the bottom still full of snail-shells and pebbles, which we were
fond of storing there with more perishable things; and, as fresh as
reality, it appeared that i beheld my early playmate seated on the
withered turf: his dark, square head bent forward, and his little hand
scooping out the earth with a piece of slate. “poor hindley!” i
exclaimed, involuntarily. i started: my bodily eye was cheated into a
momentary belief that the child lifted its face and stared straight
into mine! it vanished in a twinkling; but immediately i felt an
irresistible yearning to be at the heights. superstition urged me to
comply with this impulse: supposing he should be dead! i thought—or
should die soon!—supposing it were a sign of death! the nearer i got to
the house the more agitated i grew; and on catching sight of it i
trembled in every limb. the apparition had outstripped me: it stood
looking through the gate. that was my first idea on observing an
elf-locked, brown-eyed boy setting his ruddy countenance against the
bars. further reflection suggested this must be hareton, _my_ hareton,
not altered greatly since i left him, ten months since.

“god bless thee, darling!” i cried, forgetting instantaneously my
foolish fears. “hareton, it’s nelly! nelly, thy nurse.”

he retreated out of arm’s length, and picked up a large flint.

“i am come to see thy father, hareton,” i added, guessing from the
action that nelly, if she lived in his memory at all, was not
recognised as one with me.

he raised his missile to hurl it; i commenced a soothing speech, but
could not stay his hand: the stone struck my bonnet; and then ensued,
from the stammering lips of the little fellow, a string of curses,
which, whether he comprehended them or not, were delivered with
practised emphasis, and distorted his baby features into a shocking
expression of malignity. you may be certain this grieved more than
angered me. fit to cry, i took an orange from my pocket, and offered it
to propitiate him. he hesitated, and then snatched it from my hold; as
if he fancied i only intended to tempt and disappoint him. i showed
another, keeping it out of his reach.

“who has taught you those fine words, my bairn?” i inquired. “the
curate?”

“damn the curate, and thee! gie me that,” he replied.

“tell us where you got your lessons, and you shall have it,” said i.
“who’s your master?”

“devil daddy,” was his answer.

“and what do you learn from daddy?” i continued.

he jumped at the fruit; i raised it higher. “what does he teach you?” i
asked.

“naught,” said he, “but to keep out of his gait. daddy cannot bide me,
because i swear at him.”

“ah! and the devil teaches you to swear at daddy?” i observed.

“ay—nay,” he drawled.

“who, then?”

“heathcliff.”

“i asked if he liked mr. heathcliff.”

“ay!” he answered again.

desiring to have his reasons for liking him, i could only gather the
sentences—“i known’t: he pays dad back what he gies to me—he curses
daddy for cursing me. he says i mun do as i will.”

“and the curate does not teach you to read and write, then?” i pursued.

“no, i was told the curate should have his —— teeth dashed down his ——
throat, if he stepped over the threshold—heathcliff had promised that!”

i put the orange in his hand, and bade him tell his father that a woman
called nelly dean was waiting to speak with him, by the garden gate. he
went up the walk, and entered the house; but, instead of hindley,
heathcliff appeared on the door-stones; and i turned directly and ran
down the road as hard as ever i could race, making no halt till i
gained the guide-post, and feeling as scared as if i had raised a
goblin. this is not much connected with miss isabella’s affair: except
that it urged me to resolve further on mounting vigilant guard, and
doing my utmost to check the spread of such bad influence at the
grange: even though i should wake a domestic storm, by thwarting mrs.
linton’s pleasure.

the next time heathcliff came my young lady chanced to be feeding some
pigeons in the court. she had never spoken a word to her sister-in-law
for three days; but she had likewise dropped her fretful complaining,
and we found it a great comfort. heathcliff had not the habit of
bestowing a single unnecessary civility on miss linton, i knew. now, as
soon as he beheld her, his first precaution was to take a sweeping
survey of the house-front. i was standing by the kitchen-window, but i
drew out of sight. he then stepped across the pavement to her, and said
something: she seemed embarrassed, and desirous of getting away; to
prevent it, he laid his hand on her arm. she averted her face: he
apparently put some question which she had no mind to answer. there was
another rapid glance at the house, and supposing himself unseen, the
scoundrel had the impudence to embrace her.

“judas! traitor!” i ejaculated. “you are a hypocrite, too, are you? a
deliberate deceiver.”

“who is, nelly?” said catherine’s voice at my elbow: i had been
over-intent on watching the pair outside to mark her entrance.

“your worthless friend!” i answered, warmly: “the sneaking rascal
yonder. ah, he has caught a glimpse of us—he is coming in! i wonder
will he have the heart to find a plausible excuse for making love to
miss, when he told you he hated her?”

mrs. linton saw isabella tear herself free, and run into the garden;
and a minute after, heathcliff opened the door. i couldn’t withhold
giving some loose to my indignation; but catherine angrily insisted on
silence, and threatened to order me out of the kitchen, if i dared to
be so presumptuous as to put in my insolent tongue.

“to hear you, people might think you were the mistress!” she cried.
“you want setting down in your right place! heathcliff, what are you
about, raising this stir? i said you must let isabella alone!—i beg you
will, unless you are tired of being received here, and wish linton to
draw the bolts against you!”

“god forbid that he should try!” answered the black villain. i detested
him just then. “god keep him meek and patient! every day i grow madder
after sending him to heaven!”

“hush!” said catherine, shutting the inner door. “don’t vex me. why
have you disregarded my request? did she come across you on purpose?”

“what is it to you?” he growled. “i have a right to kiss her, if she
chooses; and you have no right to object. i am not _your_ husband:
_you_ needn’t be jealous of me!”

“i’m not jealous of you,” replied the mistress; “i’m jealous for you.
clear your face: you sha’n’t scowl at me! if you like isabella, you
shall marry her. but do you like her? tell the truth, heathcliff!
there, you won’t answer. i’m certain you don’t.”

“and would mr. linton approve of his sister marrying that man?” i
inquired.

“mr. linton should approve,” returned my lady, decisively.

“he might spare himself the trouble,” said heathcliff: “i could do as
well without his approbation. and as to you, catherine, i have a mind
to speak a few words now, while we are at it. i want you to be aware
that i _know_ you have treated me infernally—infernally! do you hear?
and if you flatter yourself that i don’t perceive it, you are a fool;
and if you think i can be consoled by sweet words, you are an idiot:
and if you fancy i’ll suffer unrevenged, i’ll convince you of the
contrary, in a very little while! meantime, thank you for telling me
your sister-in-law’s secret: i swear i’ll make the most of it. and
stand you aside!”

“what new phase of his character is this?” exclaimed mrs. linton, in
amazement. “i’ve treated you infernally—and you’ll take your revenge!
how will you take it, ungrateful brute? how have i treated you
infernally?”

“i seek no revenge on you,” replied heathcliff, less vehemently.
“that’s not the plan. the tyrant grinds down his slaves and they don’t
turn against him; they crush those beneath them. you are welcome to
torture me to death for your amusement, only allow me to amuse myself a
little in the same style, and refrain from insult as much as you are
able. having levelled my palace, don’t erect a hovel and complacently
admire your own charity in giving me that for a home. if i imagined you
really wished me to marry isabel, i’d cut my throat!”

“oh, the evil is that i am _not_ jealous, is it?” cried catherine.
“well, i won’t repeat my offer of a wife: it is as bad as offering
satan a lost soul. your bliss lies, like his, in inflicting misery. you
prove it. edgar is restored from the ill-temper he gave way to at your
coming; i begin to be secure and tranquil; and you, restless to know us
at peace, appear resolved on exciting a quarrel. quarrel with edgar, if
you please, heathcliff, and deceive his sister: you’ll hit on exactly
the most efficient method of revenging yourself on me.”

the conversation ceased. mrs. linton sat down by the fire, flushed and
gloomy. the spirit which served her was growing intractable: she could
neither lay nor control it. he stood on the hearth with folded arms,
brooding on his evil thoughts; and in this position i left them to seek
the master, who was wondering what kept catherine below so long.

“ellen,” said he, when i entered, “have you seen your mistress?”

“yes; she’s in the kitchen, sir,” i answered. “she’s sadly put out by
mr. heathcliff’s behaviour: and, indeed, i do think it’s time to
arrange his visits on another footing. there’s harm in being too soft,
and now it’s come to this—.” and i related the scene in the court, and,
as near as i dared, the whole subsequent dispute. i fancied it could
not be very prejudicial to mrs. linton; unless she made it so
afterwards, by assuming the defensive for her guest. edgar linton had
difficulty in hearing me to the close. his first words revealed that he
did not clear his wife of blame.

“this is insufferable!” he exclaimed. “it is disgraceful that she
should own him for a friend, and force his company on me! call me two
men out of the hall, ellen. catherine shall linger no longer to argue
with the low ruffian—i have humoured her enough.”

he descended, and bidding the servants wait in the passage, went,
followed by me, to the kitchen. its occupants had recommenced their
angry discussion: mrs. linton, at least, was scolding with renewed
vigour; heathcliff had moved to the window, and hung his head, somewhat
cowed by her violent rating apparently. he saw the master first, and
made a hasty motion that she should be silent; which she obeyed,
abruptly, on discovering the reason of his intimation.

“how is this?” said linton, addressing her; “what notion of propriety
must you have to remain here, after the language which has been held to
you by that blackguard? i suppose, because it is his ordinary talk you
think nothing of it: you are habituated to his baseness, and, perhaps,
imagine i can get used to it too!”

“have you been listening at the door, edgar?” asked the mistress, in a
tone particularly calculated to provoke her husband, implying both
carelessness and contempt of his irritation. heathcliff, who had raised
his eyes at the former speech, gave a sneering laugh at the latter; on
purpose, it seemed, to draw mr. linton’s attention to him. he
succeeded; but edgar did not mean to entertain him with any high
flights of passion.

“i’ve been so far forbearing with you, sir,” he said quietly; “not that
i was ignorant of your miserable, degraded character, but i felt you
were only partly responsible for that; and catherine wishing to keep up
your acquaintance, i acquiesced—foolishly. your presence is a moral
poison that would contaminate the most virtuous: for that cause, and to
prevent worse consequences, i shall deny you hereafter admission into
this house, and give notice now that i require your instant departure.
three minutes’ delay will render it involuntary and ignominious.”

heathcliff measured the height and breadth of the speaker with an eye
full of derision.

“cathy, this lamb of yours threatens like a bull!” he said. “it is in
danger of splitting its skull against my knuckles. by god! mr. linton,
i’m mortally sorry that you are not worth knocking down!”

my master glanced towards the passage, and signed me to fetch the men:
he had no intention of hazarding a personal encounter. i obeyed the
hint; but mrs. linton, suspecting something, followed; and when i
attempted to call them, she pulled me back, slammed the door to, and
locked it.

“fair means!” she said, in answer to her husband’s look of angry
surprise. “if you have not courage to attack him, make an apology, or
allow yourself to be beaten. it will correct you of feigning more
valour than you possess. no, i’ll swallow the key before you shall get
it! i’m delightfully rewarded for my kindness to each! after constant
indulgence of one’s weak nature, and the other’s bad one, i earn for
thanks two samples of blind ingratitude, stupid to absurdity! edgar, i
was defending you and yours; and i wish heathcliff may flog you sick,
for daring to think an evil thought of me!”

it did not need the medium of a flogging to produce that effect on the
master. he tried to wrest the key from catherine’s grasp, and for
safety she flung it into the hottest part of the fire; whereupon mr.
edgar was taken with a nervous trembling, and his countenance grew
deadly pale. for his life he could not avert that excess of emotion:
mingled anguish and humiliation overcame him completely. he leant on
the back of a chair, and covered his face.

“oh, heavens! in old days this would win you knighthood!” exclaimed
mrs. linton. “we are vanquished! we are vanquished! heathcliff would as
soon lift a finger at you as the king would march his army against a
colony of mice. cheer up! you sha’n’t be hurt! your type is not a lamb,
it’s a sucking leveret.”

“i wish you joy of the milk-blooded coward, cathy!” said her friend. “i
compliment you on your taste. and that is the slavering, shivering
thing you preferred to me! i would not strike him with my fist, but i’d
kick him with my foot, and experience considerable satisfaction. is he
weeping, or is he going to faint for fear?”

the fellow approached and gave the chair on which linton rested a push.
he’d better have kept his distance: my master quickly sprang erect, and
struck him full on the throat a blow that would have levelled a
slighter man. it took his breath for a minute; and while he choked, mr.
linton walked out by the back door into the yard, and from thence to
the front entrance.

“there! you’ve done with coming here,” cried catherine. “get away, now;
he’ll return with a brace of pistols and half-a-dozen assistants. if he
did overhear us, of course he’d never forgive you. you’ve played me an
ill turn, heathcliff! but go—make haste! i’d rather see edgar at bay
than you.”

“do you suppose i’m going with that blow burning in my gullet?” he
thundered. “by hell, no! i’ll crush his ribs in like a rotten hazel-nut
before i cross the threshold! if i don’t floor him now, i shall murder
him some time; so, as you value his existence, let me get at him!”

“he is not coming,” i interposed, framing a bit of a lie. “there’s the
coachman and the two gardeners; you’ll surely not wait to be thrust
into the road by them! each has a bludgeon; and master will, very
likely, be watching from the parlour-windows to see that they fulfil
his orders.”

the gardeners and coachman _were_ there: but linton was with them. they
had already entered the court. heathcliff, on the second thoughts,
resolved to avoid a struggle against three underlings: he seized the
poker, smashed the lock from the inner door, and made his escape as
they tramped in.

mrs. linton, who was very much excited, bade me accompany her upstairs.
she did not know my share in contributing to the disturbance, and i was
anxious to keep her in ignorance.

“i’m nearly distracted, nelly!” she exclaimed, throwing herself on the
sofa. “a thousand smiths’ hammers are beating in my head! tell isabella
to shun me; this uproar is owing to her; and should she or any one else
aggravate my anger at present, i shall get wild. and, nelly, say to
edgar, if you see him again to-night, that i’m in danger of being
seriously ill. i wish it may prove true. he has startled and distressed
me shockingly! i want to frighten him. besides, he might come and begin
a string of abuse or complainings; i’m certain i should recriminate,
and god knows where we should end! will you do so, my good nelly? you
are aware that i am no way blamable in this matter. what possessed him
to turn listener? heathcliff’s talk was outrageous, after you left us;
but i could soon have diverted him from isabella, and the rest meant
nothing. now all is dashed wrong; by the fool’s craving to hear evil of
self, that haunts some people like a demon! had edgar never gathered
our conversation, he would never have been the worse for it. really,
when he opened on me in that unreasonable tone of displeasure after i
had scolded heathcliff till i was hoarse for _him;_ i did not care
hardly what they did to each other; especially as i felt that, however
the scene closed, we should all be driven asunder for nobody knows how
long! well, if i cannot keep heathcliff for my friend—if edgar will be
mean and jealous, i’ll try to break their hearts by breaking my own.
that will be a prompt way of finishing all, when i am pushed to
extremity! but it’s a deed to be reserved for a forlorn hope; i’d not
take linton by surprise with it. to this point he has been discreet in
dreading to provoke me; you must represent the peril of quitting that
policy, and remind him of my passionate temper, verging, when kindled,
on frenzy. i wish you could dismiss that apathy out of that
countenance, and look rather more anxious about me.”

the stolidity with which i received these instructions was, no doubt,
rather exasperating: for they were delivered in perfect sincerity; but
i believed a person who could plan the turning of her fits of passion
to account, beforehand, might, by exerting her will, manage to control
herself tolerably, even while under their influence; and i did not wish
to “frighten” her husband, as she said, and multiply his annoyances for
the purpose of serving her selfishness. therefore i said nothing when i
met the master coming towards the parlour; but i took the liberty of
turning back to listen whether they would resume their quarrel
together. he began to speak first.

“remain where you are, catherine,” he said; without any anger in his
voice, but with much sorrowful despondency. “i shall not stay. i am
neither come to wrangle nor be reconciled; but i wish just to learn
whether, after this evening’s events, you intend to continue your
intimacy with—”

“oh, for mercy’s sake,” interrupted the mistress, stamping her foot,
“for mercy’s sake, let us hear no more of it now! your cold blood
cannot be worked into a fever: your veins are full of ice-water; but
mine are boiling, and the sight of such chillness makes them dance.”

“to get rid of me, answer my question,” persevered mr. linton. “you
_must_ answer it; and that violence does not alarm me. i have found
that you can be as stoical as anyone, when you please. will you give up
heathcliff hereafter, or will you give up me? it is impossible for you
to be _my_ friend and _his_ at the same time; and i absolutely
_require_ to know which you choose.”

“i require to be let alone!” exclaimed catherine, furiously. “i demand
it! don’t you see i can scarcely stand? edgar, you—you leave me!”

she rang the bell till it broke with a twang; i entered leisurely. it
was enough to try the temper of a saint, such senseless, wicked rages!
there she lay dashing her head against the arm of the sofa, and
grinding her teeth, so that you might fancy she would crash them to
splinters! mr. linton stood looking at her in sudden compunction and
fear. he told me to fetch some water. she had no breath for speaking. i
brought a glass full; and as she would not drink, i sprinkled it on her
face. in a few seconds she stretched herself out stiff, and turned up
her eyes, while her cheeks, at once blanched and livid, assumed the
aspect of death. linton looked terrified.

“there is nothing in the world the matter,” i whispered. i did not want
him to yield, though i could not help being afraid in my heart.

“she has blood on her lips!” he said, shuddering.

“never mind!” i answered, tartly. and i told him how she had resolved,
previous to his coming, on exhibiting a fit of frenzy. i incautiously
gave the account aloud, and she heard me; for she started up—her hair
flying over her shoulders, her eyes flashing, the muscles of her neck
and arms standing out preternaturally. i made up my mind for broken
bones, at least; but she only glared about her for an instant, and then
rushed from the room. the master directed me to follow; i did, to her
chamber-door: she hindered me from going further by securing it against
me.

as she never offered to descend to breakfast next morning, i went to
ask whether she would have some carried up. “no!” she replied,
peremptorily. the same question was repeated at dinner and tea; and
again on the morrow after, and received the same answer. mr. linton, on
his part, spent his time in the library, and did not inquire concerning
his wife’s occupations. isabella and he had had an hour’s interview,
during which he tried to elicit from her some sentiment of proper
horror for heathcliff’s advances: but he could make nothing of her
evasive replies, and was obliged to close the examination
unsatisfactorily; adding, however, a solemn warning, that if she were
so insane as to encourage that worthless suitor, it would dissolve all
bonds of relationship between herself and him.




chapter xii


while miss linton moped about the park and garden, always silent, and
almost always in tears; and her brother shut himself up among books
that he never opened—wearying, i guessed, with a continual vague
expectation that catherine, repenting her conduct, would come of her
own accord to ask pardon, and seek a reconciliation—and _she_ fasted
pertinaciously, under the idea, probably, that at every meal edgar was
ready to choke for her absence, and pride alone held him from running
to cast himself at her feet; i went about my household duties,
convinced that the grange had but one sensible soul in its walls, and
that lodged in my body. i wasted no condolences on miss, nor any
expostulations on my mistress; nor did i pay much attention to the
sighs of my master, who yearned to hear his lady’s name, since he might
not hear her voice. i determined they should come about as they pleased
for me; and though it was a tiresomely slow process, i began to rejoice
at length in a faint dawn of its progress: as i thought at first.

mrs. linton, on the third day, unbarred her door, and having finished
the water in her pitcher and decanter, desired a renewed supply, and a
basin of gruel, for she believed she was dying. that i set down as a
speech meant for edgar’s ears; i believed no such thing, so i kept it
to myself and brought her some tea and dry toast. she ate and drank
eagerly, and sank back on her pillow again, clenching her hands and
groaning. “oh, i will die,” she exclaimed, “since no one cares anything
about me. i wish i had not taken that.” then a good while after i heard
her murmur, “no, i’ll not die—he’d be glad—he does not love me at
all—he would never miss me!”

“did you want anything, ma’am?” i inquired, still preserving my
external composure, in spite of her ghastly countenance and strange,
exaggerated manner.

“what is that apathetic being doing?” she demanded, pushing the thick
entangled locks from her wasted face. “has he fallen into a lethargy,
or is he dead?”

“neither,” replied i; “if you mean mr. linton. he’s tolerably well, i
think, though his studies occupy him rather more than they ought: he is
continually among his books, since he has no other society.”

i should not have spoken so if i had known her true condition, but i
could not get rid of the notion that she acted a part of her disorder.

“among his books!” she cried, confounded. “and i dying! i on the brink
of the grave! my god! does he know how i’m altered?” continued she,
staring at her reflection in a mirror hanging against the opposite
wall. “is that catherine linton? he imagines me in a pet—in play,
perhaps. cannot you inform him that it is frightful earnest? nelly, if
it be not too late, as soon as i learn how he feels, i’ll choose
between these two: either to starve at once—that would be no punishment
unless he had a heart—or to recover, and leave the country. are you
speaking the truth about him now? take care. is he actually so utterly
indifferent for my life?”

“why, ma’am,” i answered, “the master has no idea of your being
deranged; and of course he does not fear that you will let yourself die
of hunger.”

“you think not? cannot you tell him i will?” she returned. “persuade
him! speak of your own mind: say you are certain i will!”

“no, you forget, mrs. linton,” i suggested, “that you have eaten some
food with a relish this evening, and to-morrow you will perceive its
good effects.”

“if i were only sure it would kill him,” she interrupted, “i’d kill
myself directly! these three awful nights i’ve never closed my lids—and
oh, i’ve been tormented! i’ve been haunted, nelly! but i begin to fancy
you don’t like me. how strange! i thought, though everybody hated and
despised each other, they could not avoid loving me. and they have all
turned to enemies in a few hours. _they_ have, i’m positive; the people
_here_. how dreary to meet death, surrounded by their cold faces!
isabella, terrified and repelled, afraid to enter the room, it would be
so dreadful to watch catherine go. and edgar standing solemnly by to
see it over; then offering prayers of thanks to god for restoring peace
to his house, and going back to his _books_! what in the name of all
that feels has he to do with _books_, when i am dying?”

she could not bear the notion which i had put into her head of mr.
linton’s philosophical resignation. tossing about, she increased her
feverish bewilderment to madness, and tore the pillow with her teeth;
then raising herself up all burning, desired that i would open the
window. we were in the middle of winter, the wind blew strong from the
north-east, and i objected. both the expressions flitting over her
face, and the changes of her moods, began to alarm me terribly; and
brought to my recollection her former illness, and the doctor’s
injunction that she should not be crossed. a minute previously she was
violent; now, supported on one arm, and not noticing my refusal to obey
her, she seemed to find childish diversion in pulling the feathers from
the rents she had just made, and ranging them on the sheet according to
their different species: her mind had strayed to other associations.

“that’s a turkey’s,” she murmured to herself; “and this is a wild
duck’s; and this is a pigeon’s. ah, they put pigeons’ feathers in the
pillows—no wonder i couldn’t die! let me take care to throw it on the
floor when i lie down. and here is a moor-cock’s; and this—i should
know it among a thousand—it’s a lapwing’s. bonny bird; wheeling over
our heads in the middle of the moor. it wanted to get to its nest, for
the clouds had touched the swells, and it felt rain coming. this
feather was picked up from the heath, the bird was not shot: we saw its
nest in the winter, full of little skeletons. heathcliff set a trap
over it, and the old ones dared not come. i made him promise he’d never
shoot a lapwing after that, and he didn’t. yes, here are more! did he
shoot my lapwings, nelly? are they red, any of them? let me look.”

“give over with that baby-work!” i interrupted, dragging the pillow
away, and turning the holes towards the mattress, for she was removing
its contents by handfuls. “lie down and shut your eyes: you’re
wandering. there’s a mess! the down is flying about like snow.”

i went here and there collecting it.

“i see in you, nelly,” she continued dreamily, “an aged woman: you have
grey hair and bent shoulders. this bed is the fairy cave under
penistone crags, and you are gathering elf-bolts to hurt our heifers;
pretending, while i am near, that they are only locks of wool. that’s
what you’ll come to fifty years hence: i know you are not so now. i’m
not wandering: you’re mistaken, or else i should believe you really
_were_ that withered hag, and i should think i _was_ under penistone
crags; and i’m conscious it’s night, and there are two candles on the
table making the black press shine like jet.”

“the black press? where is that?” i asked. “you are talking in your
sleep!”

“it’s against the wall, as it always is,” she replied. “it _does_
appear odd—i see a face in it!”

“there’s no press in the room, and never was,” said i, resuming my
seat, and looping up the curtain that i might watch her.

“don’t _you_ see that face?” she inquired, gazing earnestly at the
mirror.

and say what i could, i was incapable of making her comprehend it to be
her own; so i rose and covered it with a shawl.

“it’s behind there still!” she pursued, anxiously. “and it stirred. who
is it? i hope it will not come out when you are gone! oh! nelly, the
room is haunted! i’m afraid of being alone!”

i took her hand in mine, and bid her be composed; for a succession of
shudders convulsed her frame, and she _would_ keep straining her gaze
towards the glass.

“there’s nobody here!” i insisted. “it was _yourself_, mrs. linton: you
knew it a while since.”

“myself!” she gasped, “and the clock is striking twelve! it’s true,
then! that’s dreadful!”

her fingers clutched the clothes, and gathered them over her eyes. i
attempted to steal to the door with an intention of calling her
husband; but i was summoned back by a piercing shriek—the shawl had
dropped from the frame.

“why, what _is_ the matter?” cried i. “who is coward now? wake up! that
is the glass—the mirror, mrs. linton; and you see yourself in it, and
there am i too by your side.”

trembling and bewildered, she held me fast, but the horror gradually
passed from her countenance; its paleness gave place to a glow of
shame.

“oh, dear! i thought i was at home,” she sighed. “i thought i was lying
in my chamber at wuthering heights. because i’m weak, my brain got
confused, and i screamed unconsciously. don’t say anything; but stay
with me. i dread sleeping: my dreams appal me.”

“a sound sleep would do you good, ma’am,” i answered: “and i hope this
suffering will prevent your trying starving again.”

“oh, if i were but in my own bed in the old house!” she went on
bitterly, wringing her hands. “and that wind sounding in the firs by
the lattice. do let me feel it—it comes straight down the moor—do let
me have one breath!”

to pacify her i held the casement ajar a few seconds. a cold blast
rushed through; i closed it, and returned to my post. she lay still
now, her face bathed in tears. exhaustion of body had entirely subdued
her spirit: our fiery catherine was no better than a wailing child.

“how long is it since i shut myself in here?” she asked, suddenly
reviving.

“it was monday evening,” i replied, “and this is thursday night, or
rather friday morning, at present.”

“what! of the same week?” she exclaimed. “only that brief time?”

“long enough to live on nothing but cold water and ill-temper,”
observed i.

“well, it seems a weary number of hours,” she muttered doubtfully: “it
must be more. i remember being in the parlour after they had
quarrelled, and edgar being cruelly provoking, and me running into this
room desperate. as soon as ever i had barred the door, utter blackness
overwhelmed me, and i fell on the floor. i couldn’t explain to edgar
how certain i felt of having a fit, or going raging mad, if he
persisted in teasing me! i had no command of tongue, or brain, and he
did not guess my agony, perhaps: it barely left me sense to try to
escape from him and his voice. before i recovered sufficiently to see
and hear, it began to be dawn, and, nelly, i’ll tell you what i
thought, and what has kept recurring and recurring till i feared for my
reason. i thought as i lay there, with my head against that table leg,
and my eyes dimly discerning the grey square of the window, that i was
enclosed in the oak-panelled bed at home; and my heart ached with some
great grief which, just waking, i could not recollect. i pondered, and
worried myself to discover what it could be, and, most strangely, the
whole last seven years of my life grew a blank! i did not recall that
they had been at all. i was a child; my father was just buried, and my
misery arose from the separation that hindley had ordered between me
and heathcliff. i was laid alone, for the first time; and, rousing from
a dismal doze after a night of weeping, i lifted my hand to push the
panels aside: it struck the table-top! i swept it along the carpet, and
then memory burst in: my late anguish was swallowed in a paroxysm of
despair. i cannot say why i felt so wildly wretched: it must have been
temporary derangement; for there is scarcely cause. but, supposing at
twelve years old i had been wrenched from the heights, and every early
association, and my all in all, as heathcliff was at that time, and
been converted at a stroke into mrs. linton, the lady of thrushcross
grange, and the wife of a stranger: an exile, and outcast, thenceforth,
from what had been my world. you may fancy a glimpse of the abyss where
i grovelled! shake your head as you will, nelly, _you_ have helped to
unsettle me! you should have spoken to edgar, indeed you should, and
compelled him to leave me quiet! oh, i’m burning! i wish i were out of
doors! i wish i were a girl again, half savage and hardy, and free; and
laughing at injuries, not maddening under them! why am i so changed?
why does my blood rush into a hell of tumult at a few words? i’m sure i
should be myself were i once among the heather on those hills. open the
window again wide: fasten it open! quick, why don’t you move?”

“because i won’t give you your death of cold,” i answered.

“you won’t give me a chance of life, you mean,” she said sullenly.
“however, i’m not helpless yet; i’ll open it myself.”

and sliding from the bed before i could hinder her, she crossed the
room, walking very uncertainly, threw it back, and bent out, careless
of the frosty air that cut about her shoulders as keen as a knife. i
entreated, and finally attempted to force her to retire. but i soon
found her delirious strength much surpassed mine (she _was_ delirious,
i became convinced by her subsequent actions and ravings). there was no
moon, and everything beneath lay in misty darkness: not a light gleamed
from any house, far or near; all had been extinguished long ago: and
those at wuthering heights were never visible—still she asserted she
caught their shining.

“look!” she cried eagerly, “that’s my room with the candle in it, and
the trees swaying before it; and the other candle is in joseph’s
garret. joseph sits up late, doesn’t he? he’s waiting till i come home
that he may lock the gate. well, he’ll wait a while yet. it’s a rough
journey, and a sad heart to travel it; and we must pass by gimmerton
kirk to go that journey! we’ve braved its ghosts often together, and
dared each other to stand among the graves and ask them to come. but,
heathcliff, if i dare you now, will you venture? if you do, i’ll keep
you. i’ll not lie there by myself: they may bury me twelve feet deep,
and throw the church down over me, but i won’t rest till you are with
me. i never will!”

she paused, and resumed with a strange smile. “he’s considering—he’d
rather i’d come to him! find a way, then! not through that kirkyard.
you are slow! be content, you always followed me!”

perceiving it vain to argue against her insanity, i was planning how i
could reach something to wrap about her, without quitting my hold of
herself (for i could not trust her alone by the gaping lattice), when,
to my consternation, i heard the rattle of the door-handle, and mr.
linton entered. he had only then come from the library; and, in passing
through the lobby, had noticed our talking and been attracted by
curiosity, or fear, to examine what it signified, at that late hour.

“oh, sir!” i cried, checking the exclamation risen to his lips at the
sight which met him, and the bleak atmosphere of the chamber. “my poor
mistress is ill, and she quite masters me: i cannot manage her at all;
pray, come and persuade her to go to bed. forget your anger, for she’s
hard to guide any way but her own.”

“catherine ill?” he said, hastening to us. “shut the window, ellen!
catherine! why—”

he was silent. the haggardness of mrs. linton’s appearance smote him
speechless, and he could only glance from her to me in horrified
astonishment.

“she’s been fretting here,” i continued, “and eating scarcely anything,
and never complaining: she would admit none of us till this evening,
and so we couldn’t inform you of her state, as we were not aware of it
ourselves; but it is nothing.”

i felt i uttered my explanations awkwardly; the master frowned. “it is
nothing, is it, ellen dean?” he said sternly. “you shall account more
clearly for keeping me ignorant of this!” and he took his wife in his
arms, and looked at her with anguish.

at first she gave him no glance of recognition: he was invisible to her
abstracted gaze. the delirium was not fixed, however; having weaned her
eyes from contemplating the outer darkness, by degrees she centred her
attention on him, and discovered who it was that held her.

“ah! you are come, are you, edgar linton?” she said, with angry
animation. “you are one of those things that are ever found when least
wanted, and when you are wanted, never! i suppose we shall have plenty
of lamentations now—i see we shall—but they can’t keep me from my
narrow home out yonder: my resting-place, where i’m bound before spring
is over! there it is: not among the lintons, mind, under the
chapel-roof, but in the open air, with a head-stone; and you may please
yourself whether you go to them or come to me!”

“catherine, what have you done?” commenced the master. “am i nothing to
you any more? do you love that wretch heath—”

“hush!” cried mrs. linton. “hush, this moment! you mention that name
and i end the matter instantly by a spring from the window! what you
touch at present you may have; but my soul will be on that hill-top
before you lay hands on me again. i don’t want you, edgar: i’m past
wanting you. return to your books. i’m glad you possess a consolation,
for all you had in me is gone.”

“her mind wanders, sir,” i interposed. “she has been talking nonsense
the whole evening; but let her have quiet, and proper attendance, and
she’ll rally. hereafter, we must be cautious how we vex her.”

“i desire no further advice from you,” answered mr. linton. “you knew
your mistress’s nature, and you encouraged me to harass her. and not to
give me one hint of how she has been these three days! it was
heartless! months of sickness could not cause such a change!”

i began to defend myself, thinking it too bad to be blamed for
another’s wicked waywardness. “i knew mrs. linton’s nature to be
headstrong and domineering,” cried i: “but i didn’t know that you
wished to foster her fierce temper! i didn’t know that, to humour her,
i should wink at mr. heathcliff. i performed the duty of a faithful
servant in telling you, and i have got a faithful servant’s wages!
well, it will teach me to be careful next time. next time you may
gather intelligence for yourself!”

“the next time you bring a tale to me you shall quit my service, ellen
dean,” he replied.

“you’d rather hear nothing about it, i suppose, then, mr. linton?” said
i. “heathcliff has your permission to come a-courting to miss, and to
drop in at every opportunity your absence offers, on purpose to poison
the mistress against you?”

confused as catherine was, her wits were alert at applying our
conversation.

“ah! nelly has played traitor,” she exclaimed, passionately. “nelly is
my hidden enemy. you witch! so you do seek elf-bolts to hurt us! let me
go, and i’ll make her rue! i’ll make her howl a recantation!”

a maniac’s fury kindled under her brows; she struggled desperately to
disengage herself from linton’s arms. i felt no inclination to tarry
the event; and, resolving to seek medical aid on my own responsibility,
i quitted the chamber.

in passing the garden to reach the road, at a place where a bridle hook
is driven into the wall, i saw something white moved irregularly,
evidently by another agent than the wind. notwithstanding my hurry, i
stayed to examine it, lest ever after i should have the conviction
impressed on my imagination that it was a creature of the other world.
my surprise and perplexity were great on discovering, by touch more
than vision, miss isabella’s springer, fanny, suspended by a
handkerchief, and nearly at its last gasp. i quickly released the
animal, and lifted it into the garden. i had seen it follow its
mistress upstairs when she went to bed; and wondered much how it could
have got out there, and what mischievous person had treated it so.
while untying the knot round the hook, it seemed to me that i
repeatedly caught the beat of horses’ feet galloping at some distance;
but there were such a number of things to occupy my reflections that i
hardly gave the circumstance a thought: though it was a strange sound,
in that place, at two o’clock in the morning.

mr. kenneth was fortunately just issuing from his house to see a
patient in the village as i came up the street; and my account of
catherine linton’s malady induced him to accompany me back immediately.
he was a plain rough man; and he made no scruple to speak his doubts of
her surviving this second attack; unless she were more submissive to
his directions than she had shown herself before.

“nelly dean,” said he, “i can’t help fancying there’s an extra cause
for this. what has there been to do at the grange? we’ve odd reports up
here. a stout, hearty lass like catherine does not fall ill for a
trifle; and that sort of people should not either. it’s hard work
bringing them through fevers, and such things. how did it begin?”

“the master will inform you,” i answered; “but you are acquainted with
the earnshaws’ violent dispositions, and mrs. linton caps them all. i
may say this; it commenced in a quarrel. she was struck during a
tempest of passion with a kind of fit. that’s her account, at least:
for she flew off in the height of it, and locked herself up.
afterwards, she refused to eat, and now she alternately raves and
remains in a half dream; knowing those about her, but having her mind
filled with all sorts of strange ideas and illusions.”

“mr. linton will be sorry?” observed kenneth, interrogatively.

“sorry? he’ll break his heart should anything happen!” i replied.
“don’t alarm him more than necessary.”

“well, i told him to beware,” said my companion; “and he must bide the
consequences of neglecting my warning! hasn’t he been intimate with mr.
heathcliff lately?”

“heathcliff frequently visits at the grange,” answered i, “though more
on the strength of the mistress having known him when a boy, than
because the master likes his company. at present he’s discharged from
the trouble of calling; owing to some presumptuous aspirations after
miss linton which he manifested. i hardly think he’ll be taken in
again.”

“and does miss linton turn a cold shoulder on him?” was the doctor’s
next question.

“i’m not in her confidence,” returned i, reluctant to continue the
subject.

“no, she’s a sly one,” he remarked, shaking his head. “she keeps her
own counsel! but she’s a real little fool. i have it from good
authority that last night (and a pretty night it was!) she and
heathcliff were walking in the plantation at the back of your house
above two hours; and he pressed her not to go in again, but just mount
his horse and away with him! my informant said she could only put him
off by pledging her word of honour to be prepared on their first
meeting after that: when it was to be he didn’t hear; but you urge mr.
linton to look sharp!”

this news filled me with fresh fears; i outstripped kenneth, and ran
most of the way back. the little dog was yelping in the garden yet. i
spared a minute to open the gate for it, but instead of going to the
house door, it coursed up and down snuffing the grass, and would have
escaped to the road, had i not seized it and conveyed it in with me. on
ascending to isabella’s room, my suspicions were confirmed: it was
empty. had i been a few hours sooner mrs. linton’s illness might have
arrested her rash step. but what could be done now? there was a bare
possibility of overtaking them if pursued instantly. _i_ could not
pursue them, however; and i dared not rouse the family, and fill the
place with confusion; still less unfold the business to my master,
absorbed as he was in his present calamity, and having no heart to
spare for a second grief! i saw nothing for it but to hold my tongue,
and suffer matters to take their course; and kenneth being arrived, i
went with a badly composed countenance to announce him. catherine lay
in a troubled sleep: her husband had succeeded in soothing the excess
of frenzy; he now hung over her pillow, watching every shade and every
change of her painfully expressive features.

the doctor, on examining the case for himself, spoke hopefully to him
of its having a favourable termination, if we could only preserve
around her perfect and constant tranquillity. to me, he signified the
threatening danger was not so much death, as permanent alienation of
intellect.

i did not close my eyes that night, nor did mr. linton: indeed, we
never went to bed; and the servants were all up long before the usual
hour, moving through the house with stealthy tread, and exchanging
whispers as they encountered each other in their vocations. every one
was active but miss isabella; and they began to remark how sound she
slept: her brother, too, asked if she had risen, and seemed impatient
for her presence, and hurt that she showed so little anxiety for her
sister-in-law. i trembled lest he should send me to call her; but i was
spared the pain of being the first proclaimant of her flight. one of
the maids, a thoughtless girl, who had been on an early errand to
gimmerton, came panting upstairs, open-mouthed, and dashed into the
chamber, crying: “oh, dear, dear! what mun we have next? master,
master, our young lady—”

“hold your noise!” cried i hastily, enraged at her clamorous manner.

“speak lower, mary—what is the matter?” said mr. linton. “what ails
your young lady?”

“she’s gone, she’s gone! yon’ heathcliff’s run off wi’ her!” gasped the
girl.

“that is not true!” exclaimed linton, rising in agitation. “it cannot
be: how has the idea entered your head? ellen dean, go and seek her. it
is incredible: it cannot be.”

as he spoke he took the servant to the door, and then repeated his
demand to know her reasons for such an assertion.

“why, i met on the road a lad that fetches milk here,” she stammered,
“and he asked whether we weren’t in trouble at the grange. i thought he
meant for missis’s sickness, so i answered, yes. then says he, ‘there’s
somebody gone after ’em, i guess?’ i stared. he saw i knew nought about
it, and he told how a gentleman and lady had stopped to have a horse’s
shoe fastened at a blacksmith’s shop, two miles out of gimmerton, not
very long after midnight! and how the blacksmith’s lass had got up to
spy who they were: she knew them both directly. and she noticed the
man—heathcliff it was, she felt certain: nob’dy could mistake him,
besides—put a sovereign in her father’s hand for payment. the lady had
a cloak about her face; but having desired a sup of water, while she
drank it fell back, and she saw her very plain. heathcliff held both
bridles as they rode on, and they set their faces from the village, and
went as fast as the rough roads would let them. the lass said nothing
to her father, but she told it all over gimmerton this morning.”

i ran and peeped, for form’s sake, into isabella’s room; confirming,
when i returned, the servant’s statement. mr. linton had resumed his
seat by the bed; on my re-entrance, he raised his eyes, read the
meaning of my blank aspect, and dropped them without giving an order,
or uttering a word.

“are we to try any measures for overtaking and bringing her back,” i
inquired. “how should we do?”

“she went of her own accord,” answered the master; “she had a right to
go if she pleased. trouble me no more about her. hereafter she is only
my sister in name: not because i disown her, but because she has
disowned me.”

and that was all he said on the subject: he did not make a single inquiry
further, or mention her in any way, except directing me to send what
property she had in the house to her fresh home, wherever it was, when
i knew it.




chapter xiii


for two months the fugitives remained absent; in those two months, mrs.
linton encountered and conquered the worst shock of what was
denominated a brain fever. no mother could have nursed an only child
more devotedly than edgar tended her. day and night he was watching,
and patiently enduring all the annoyances that irritable nerves and a
shaken reason could inflict; and, though kenneth remarked that what he
saved from the grave would only recompense his care by forming the
source of constant future anxiety—in fact, that his health and strength
were being sacrificed to preserve a mere ruin of humanity—he knew no
limits in gratitude and joy when catherine’s life was declared out of
danger; and hour after hour he would sit beside her, tracing the
gradual return to bodily health, and flattering his too sanguine hopes
with the illusion that her mind would settle back to its right balance
also, and she would soon be entirely her former self.

the first time she left her chamber was at the commencement of the
following march. mr. linton had put on her pillow, in the morning, a
handful of golden crocuses; her eye, long stranger to any gleam of
pleasure, caught them in waking, and shone delighted as she gathered
them eagerly together.

“these are the earliest flowers at the heights,” she exclaimed. “they
remind me of soft thaw winds, and warm sunshine, and nearly melted
snow. edgar, is there not a south wind, and is not the snow almost
gone?”

“the snow is quite gone down here, darling,” replied her husband; “and
i only see two white spots on the whole range of moors: the sky is
blue, and the larks are singing, and the becks and brooks are all brim
full. catherine, last spring at this time, i was longing to have you
under this roof; now, i wish you were a mile or two up those hills: the
air blows so sweetly, i feel that it would cure you.”

“i shall never be there but once more,” said the invalid; “and then
you’ll leave me, and i shall remain for ever. next spring you’ll long
again to have me under this roof, and you’ll look back and think you
were happy to-day.”

linton lavished on her the kindest caresses, and tried to cheer her by
the fondest words; but, vaguely regarding the flowers, she let the
tears collect on her lashes and stream down her cheeks unheeding. we
knew she was really better, and, therefore, decided that long
confinement to a single place produced much of this despondency, and it
might be partially removed by a change of scene. the master told me to
light a fire in the many-weeks’ deserted parlour, and to set an
easy-chair in the sunshine by the window; and then he brought her down,
and she sat a long while enjoying the genial heat, and, as we expected,
revived by the objects round her: which, though familiar, were free
from the dreary associations investing her hated sick chamber. by
evening she seemed greatly exhausted; yet no arguments could persuade
her to return to that apartment, and i had to arrange the parlour sofa
for her bed, till another room could be prepared. to obviate the
fatigue of mounting and descending the stairs, we fitted up this, where
you lie at present—on the same floor with the parlour; and she was soon
strong enough to move from one to the other, leaning on edgar’s arm.
ah, i thought myself, she might recover, so waited on as she was. and
there was double cause to desire it, for on her existence depended that
of another: we cherished the hope that in a little while mr. linton’s
heart would be gladdened, and his lands secured from a stranger’s
gripe, by the birth of an heir.

i should mention that isabella sent to her brother, some six weeks from
her departure, a short note, announcing her marriage with heathcliff.
it appeared dry and cold; but at the bottom was dotted in with pencil
an obscure apology, and an entreaty for kind remembrance and
reconciliation, if her proceeding had offended him: asserting that she
could not help it then, and being done, she had now no power to repeal
it. linton did not reply to this, i believe; and, in a fortnight more,
i got a long letter, which i considered odd, coming from the pen of a
bride just out of the honeymoon. i’ll read it: for i keep it yet. any
relic of the dead is precious, if they were valued living.

* * * * *


dear ellen, it begins,—i came last night to wuthering heights, and
heard, for the first time, that catherine has been, and is yet, very
ill. i must not write to her, i suppose, and my brother is either too
angry or too distressed to answer what i sent him. still, i must write
to somebody, and the only choice left me is you.

inform edgar that i’d give the world to see his face again—that my
heart returned to thrushcross grange in twenty-four hours after i left
it, and is there at this moment, full of warm feelings for him, and
catherine! _i can’t follow it though_—(these words are underlined)—they
need not expect me, and they may draw what conclusions they please;
taking care, however, to lay nothing at the door of my weak will or
deficient affection.

the remainder of the letter is for yourself alone. i want to ask you
two questions: the first is,—how did you contrive to preserve the
common sympathies of human nature when you resided here? i cannot
recognise any sentiment which those around share with me.

the second question i have great interest in; it is this—is mr.
heathcliff a man? if so, is he mad? and if not, is he a devil? i
sha’n’t tell my reasons for making this inquiry; but i beseech you to
explain, if you can, what i have married: that is, when you call to see
me; and you must call, ellen, very soon. don’t write, but come, and
bring me something from edgar.

now, you shall hear how i have been received in my new home, as i am
led to imagine the heights will be. it is to amuse myself that i dwell
on such subjects as the lack of external comforts: they never occupy my
thoughts, except at the moment when i miss them. i should laugh and
dance for joy, if i found their absence was the total of my miseries,
and the rest was an unnatural dream!

the sun set behind the grange as we turned on to the moors; by that, i
judged it to be six o’clock; and my companion halted half an hour, to
inspect the park, and the gardens, and, probably, the place itself, as
well as he could; so it was dark when we dismounted in the paved yard
of the farmhouse, and your old fellow-servant, joseph, issued out to
receive us by the light of a dip candle. he did it with a courtesy that
redounded to his credit. his first act was to elevate his torch to a
level with my face, squint malignantly, project his under-lip, and turn
away. then he took the two horses, and led them into the stables;
reappearing for the purpose of locking the outer gate, as if we lived
in an ancient castle.

heathcliff stayed to speak to him, and i entered the kitchen—a dingy,
untidy hole; i daresay you would not know it, it is so changed since it
was in your charge. by the fire stood a ruffianly child, strong in limb
and dirty in garb, with a look of catherine in his eyes and about his
mouth.

“this is edgar’s legal nephew,” i reflected—“mine in a manner; i must
shake hands, and—yes—i must kiss him. it is right to establish a good
understanding at the beginning.”

i approached, and, attempting to take his chubby fist, said—“how do you
do, my dear?”

he replied in a jargon i did not comprehend.

“shall you and i be friends, hareton?” was my next essay at
conversation.

an oath, and a threat to set throttler on me if i did not “frame off”
rewarded my perseverance.

“hey, throttler, lad!” whispered the little wretch, rousing a half-bred
bull-dog from its lair in a corner. “now, wilt thou be ganging?” he
asked authoritatively.

love for my life urged a compliance; i stepped over the threshold to
wait till the others should enter. mr. heathcliff was nowhere visible;
and joseph, whom i followed to the stables, and requested to accompany
me in, after staring and muttering to himself, screwed up his nose and
replied—“mim! mim! mim! did iver christian body hear aught like it?
mincing un’ munching! how can i tell whet ye say?”

“i say, i wish you to come with me into the house!” i cried, thinking
him deaf, yet highly disgusted at his rudeness.

“none o’ me! i getten summut else to do,” he answered, and continued
his work; moving his lantern jaws meanwhile, and surveying my dress and
countenance (the former a great deal too fine, but the latter, i’m
sure, as sad as he could desire) with sovereign contempt.

i walked round the yard, and through a wicket, to another door, at
which i took the liberty of knocking, in hopes some more civil servant
might show himself. after a short suspense, it was opened by a tall,
gaunt man, without neckerchief, and otherwise extremely slovenly; his
features were lost in masses of shaggy hair that hung on his shoulders;
and _his_ eyes, too, were like a ghostly catherine’s with all their
beauty annihilated.

“what’s your business here?” he demanded, grimly. “who are you?”

“my name _was_ isabella linton,” i replied. “you’ve seen me before,
sir. i’m lately married to mr. heathcliff, and he has brought me here—i
suppose by your permission.”

“is he come back, then?” asked the hermit, glaring like a hungry wolf.

“yes—we came just now,” i said; “but he left me by the kitchen door;
and when i would have gone in, your little boy played sentinel over the
place, and frightened me off by the help of a bull-dog.”

“it’s well the hellish villain has kept his word!” growled my future
host, searching the darkness beyond me in expectation of discovering
heathcliff; and then he indulged in a soliloquy of execrations, and
threats of what he would have done had the “fiend” deceived him.

i repented having tried this second entrance, and was almost inclined
to slip away before he finished cursing, but ere i could execute that
intention, he ordered me in, and shut and re-fastened the door. there
was a great fire, and that was all the light in the huge apartment,
whose floor had grown a uniform grey; and the once brilliant
pewter-dishes, which used to attract my gaze when i was a girl, partook
of a similar obscurity, created by tarnish and dust. i inquired whether
i might call the maid, and be conducted to a bedroom! mr. earnshaw
vouchsafed no answer. he walked up and down, with his hands in his
pockets, apparently quite forgetting my presence; and his abstraction
was evidently so deep, and his whole aspect so misanthropical, that i
shrank from disturbing him again.

you’ll not be surprised, ellen, at my feeling particularly cheerless,
seated in worse than solitude on that inhospitable hearth, and
remembering that four miles distant lay my delightful home, containing
the only people i loved on earth; and there might as well be the
atlantic to part us, instead of those four miles: i could not overpass
them! i questioned with myself—where must i turn for comfort? and—mind
you don’t tell edgar, or catherine—above every sorrow beside, this rose
pre-eminent: despair at finding nobody who could or would be my ally
against heathcliff! i had sought shelter at wuthering heights, almost
gladly, because i was secured by that arrangement from living alone
with him; but he knew the people we were coming amongst, and he did not
fear their intermeddling.

i sat and thought a doleful time: the clock struck eight, and nine, and
still my companion paced to and fro, his head bent on his breast, and
perfectly silent, unless a groan or a bitter ejaculation forced itself
out at intervals. i listened to detect a woman’s voice in the house,
and filled the interim with wild regrets and dismal anticipations,
which, at last, spoke audibly in irrepressible sighing and weeping. i
was not aware how openly i grieved, till earnshaw halted opposite, in
his measured walk, and gave me a stare of newly-awakened surprise.
taking advantage of his recovered attention, i exclaimed—“i’m tired
with my journey, and i want to go to bed! where is the maid-servant?
direct me to her, as she won’t come to me!”

“we have none,” he answered; “you must wait on yourself!”

“where must i sleep, then?” i sobbed; i was beyond regarding
self-respect, weighed down by fatigue and wretchedness.

“joseph will show you heathcliff’s chamber,” said he; “open that
door—he’s in there.”

i was going to obey, but he suddenly arrested me, and added in the
strangest tone—“be so good as to turn your lock, and draw your
bolt—don’t omit it!”

“well!” i said. “but why, mr. earnshaw?” i did not relish the notion of
deliberately fastening myself in with heathcliff.

“look here!” he replied, pulling from his waistcoat a
curiously-constructed pistol, having a double-edged spring knife
attached to the barrel. “that’s a great tempter to a desperate man, is
it not? i cannot resist going up with this every night, and trying his
door. if once i find it open he’s done for; i do it invariably, even
though the minute before i have been recalling a hundred reasons that
should make me refrain: it is some devil that urges me to thwart my own
schemes by killing him. you fight against that devil for love as long
as you may; when the time comes, not all the angels in heaven shall
save him!”

i surveyed the weapon inquisitively. a hideous notion struck me: how
powerful i should be possessing such an instrument! i took it from his
hand, and touched the blade. he looked astonished at the expression my
face assumed during a brief second: it was not horror, it was
covetousness. he snatched the pistol back, jealously; shut the knife,
and returned it to its concealment.

“i don’t care if you tell him,” said he. “put him on his guard, and
watch for him. you know the terms we are on, i see: his danger does not
shock you.”

“what has heathcliff done to you?” i asked. “in what has he wronged
you, to warrant this appalling hatred? wouldn’t it be wiser to bid him
quit the house?”

“no!” thundered earnshaw; “should he offer to leave me, he’s a dead
man: persuade him to attempt it, and you are a murderess! am i to lose
_all_, without a chance of retrieval? is hareton to be a beggar? oh,
damnation! i _will_ have it back; and i’ll have _his_ gold too; and
then his blood; and hell shall have his soul! it will be ten times
blacker with that guest than ever it was before!”

you’ve acquainted me, ellen, with your old master’s habits. he is
clearly on the verge of madness: he was so last night at least. i
shuddered to be near him, and thought on the servant’s ill-bred
moroseness as comparatively agreeable. he now recommenced his moody
walk, and i raised the latch, and escaped into the kitchen. joseph was
bending over the fire, peering into a large pan that swung above it;
and a wooden bowl of oatmeal stood on the settle close by. the contents
of the pan began to boil, and he turned to plunge his hand into the
bowl; i conjectured that this preparation was probably for our supper,
and, being hungry, i resolved it should be eatable; so, crying out
sharply, “_i’ll_ make the porridge!” i removed the vessel out of his
reach, and proceeded to take off my hat and riding-habit. “mr.
earnshaw,” i continued, “directs me to wait on myself: i will. i’m not
going to act the lady among you, for fear i should starve.”

“gooid lord!” he muttered, sitting down, and stroking his ribbed
stockings from the knee to the ankle. “if there’s to be fresh
ortherings—just when i getten used to two maisters, if i mun hev’ a
_mistress_ set o’er my heead, it’s like time to be flitting. i niver
_did_ think to see t’ day that i mud lave th’ owld place—but i doubt
it’s nigh at hand!”

this lamentation drew no notice from me: i went briskly to work,
sighing to remember a period when it would have been all merry fun; but
compelled speedily to drive off the remembrance. it racked me to recall
past happiness and the greater peril there was of conjuring up its
apparition, the quicker the thible ran round, and the faster the
handfuls of meal fell into the water. joseph beheld my style of cookery
with growing indignation.

“thear!” he ejaculated. “hareton, thou willn’t sup thy porridge
to-neeght; they’ll be naught but lumps as big as my neive. thear,
agean! i’d fling in bowl un’ all, if i wer ye! there, pale t’ guilp
off, un’ then ye’ll hae done wi’t. bang, bang. it’s a mercy t’ bothom
isn’t deaved out!”

it _was_ rather a rough mess, i own, when poured into the basins; four
had been provided, and a gallon pitcher of new milk was brought from
the dairy, which hareton seized and commenced drinking and spilling
from the expansive lip. i expostulated, and desired that he should have
his in a mug; affirming that i could not taste the liquid treated so
dirtily. the old cynic chose to be vastly offended at this nicety;
assuring me, repeatedly, that “the barn was every bit as good” as i,
“and every bit as wollsome,” and wondering how i could fashion to be so
conceited. meanwhile, the infant ruffian continued sucking; and
glowered up at me defyingly, as he slavered into the jug.

“i shall have my supper in another room,” i said. “have you no place
you call a parlour?”

“_parlour_!” he echoed, sneeringly, “_parlour_! nay, we’ve noa
_parlours_. if yah dunnut loike wer company, there’s maister’s; un’ if
yah dunnut loike maister, there’s us.”

“then i shall go upstairs,” i answered; “show me a chamber.”

i put my basin on a tray, and went myself to fetch some more milk. with
great grumblings, the fellow rose, and preceded me in my ascent: we
mounted to the garrets; he opened a door, now and then, to look into
the apartments we passed.

“here’s a rahm,” he said, at last, flinging back a cranky board on
hinges. “it’s weel eneugh to ate a few porridge in. there’s a pack o’
corn i’ t’ corner, thear, meeterly clane; if ye’re feared o’ muckying
yer grand silk cloes, spread yer hankerchir o’ t’ top on’t.”

the “rahm” was a kind of lumber-hole smelling strong of malt and grain;
various sacks of which articles were piled around, leaving a wide, bare
space in the middle.

“why, man,” i exclaimed, facing him angrily, “this is not a place to
sleep in. i wish to see my bed-room.”

“_bed-rume_!” he repeated, in a tone of mockery. “yah’s see all t’
_bed-rumes_ thear is—yon’s mine.”

he pointed into the second garret, only differing from the first in
being more naked about the walls, and having a large, low, curtainless
bed, with an indigo-coloured quilt, at one end.

“what do i want with yours?” i retorted. “i suppose mr. heathcliff does
not lodge at the top of the house, does he?”

“oh! it’s maister _hathecliff’s_ ye’re wanting?” cried he, as if making
a new discovery. “couldn’t ye ha’ said soa, at onst? un’ then, i mud
ha’ telled ye, baht all this wark, that that’s just one ye cannut
see—he allas keeps it locked, un’ nob’dy iver mells on’t but hisseln.”

“you’ve a nice house, joseph,” i could not refrain from observing, “and
pleasant inmates; and i think the concentrated essence of all the
madness in the world took up its abode in my brain the day i linked my
fate with theirs! however, that is not to the present purpose—there are
other rooms. for heaven’s sake be quick, and let me settle somewhere!”

he made no reply to this adjuration; only plodding doggedly down the
wooden steps, and halting before an apartment which, from that halt
and the superior quality of its furniture, i conjectured to be the best
one. there was a carpet—a good one, but the pattern was obliterated by
dust; a fireplace hung with cut-paper, dropping to pieces; a handsome
oak-bedstead with ample crimson curtains of rather expensive material
and modern make; but they had evidently experienced rough usage: the
vallances hung in festoons, wrenched from their rings, and the iron rod
supporting them was bent in an arc on one side, causing the drapery to
trail upon the floor. the chairs were also damaged, many of them
severely; and deep indentations deformed the panels of the walls. i was
endeavouring to gather resolution for entering and taking possession,
when my fool of a guide announced,—“this here is t’ maister’s.” my
supper by this time was cold, my appetite gone, and my patience
exhausted. i insisted on being provided instantly with a place of
refuge, and means of repose.

“whear the divil?” began the religious elder. “the lord bless us! the
lord forgie us! whear the _hell_ wold ye gang? ye marred, wearisome
nowt! ye’ve seen all but hareton’s bit of a cham’er. there’s not
another hoile to lig down in i’ th’ hahse!”

i was so vexed, i flung my tray and its contents on the ground; and
then seated myself at the stairs’-head, hid my face in my hands, and
cried.

“ech! ech!” exclaimed joseph. “weel done, miss cathy! weel done, miss
cathy! howsiver, t’ maister sall just tum’le o’er them brocken pots;
un’ then we’s hear summut; we’s hear how it’s to be. gooid-for-naught
madling! ye desarve pining fro’ this to churstmas, flinging t’ precious
gifts uh god under fooit i’ yer flaysome rages! but i’m mista’en if ye
shew yer sperrit lang. will hathecliff bide sich bonny ways, think ye?
i nobbut wish he may catch ye i’ that plisky. i nobbut wish he may.”

and so he went on scolding to his den beneath, taking the candle with
him; and i remained in the dark. the period of reflection succeeding
this silly action compelled me to admit the necessity of smothering my
pride and choking my wrath, and bestirring myself to remove its
effects. an unexpected aid presently appeared in the shape of
throttler, whom i now recognised as a son of our old skulker: it had
spent its whelphood at the grange, and was given by my father to mr.
hindley. i fancy it knew me: it pushed its nose against mine by way of
salute, and then hastened to devour the porridge; while i groped from
step to step, collecting the shattered earthenware, and drying the
spatters of milk from the banister with my pocket-handkerchief. our
labours were scarcely over when i heard earnshaw’s tread in the
passage; my assistant tucked in his tail, and pressed to the wall; i
stole into the nearest doorway. the dog’s endeavour to avoid him was
unsuccessful; as i guessed by a scutter downstairs, and a prolonged,
piteous yelping. i had better luck: he passed on, entered his chamber,
and shut the door. directly after joseph came up with hareton, to put
him to bed. i had found shelter in hareton’s room, and the old man, on
seeing me, said,—“they’s rahm for boath ye un’ yer pride, now, i sud
think i’ the hahse. it’s empty; ye may hev’ it all to yerseln, un’ him
as allas maks a third, i’ sich ill company!”

gladly did i take advantage of this intimation; and the minute i flung
myself into a chair, by the fire, i nodded, and slept. my slumber was
deep and sweet, though over far too soon. mr. heathcliff awoke me; he
had just come in, and demanded, in his loving manner, what i was doing
there? i told him the cause of my staying up so late—that he had the
key of our room in his pocket. the adjective _our_ gave mortal offence.
he swore it was not, nor ever should be, mine; and he’d—but i’ll not
repeat his language, nor describe his habitual conduct: he is ingenious
and unresting in seeking to gain my abhorrence! i sometimes wonder at
him with an intensity that deadens my fear: yet, i assure you, a tiger
or a venomous serpent could not rouse terror in me equal to that which
he wakens. he told me of catherine’s illness, and accused my brother of
causing it; promising that i should be edgar’s proxy in suffering, till
he could get hold of him.

i do hate him—i am wretched—i have been a fool! beware of uttering one
breath of this to any one at the grange. i shall expect you every
day—don’t disappoint me!—isabella.




chapter xiv


as soon as i had perused this epistle i went to the master, and
informed him that his sister had arrived at the heights, and sent me a
letter expressing her sorrow for mrs. linton’s situation, and her
ardent desire to see him; with a wish that he would transmit to her, as
early as possible, some token of forgiveness by me.

“forgiveness!” said linton. “i have nothing to forgive her, ellen. you
may call at wuthering heights this afternoon, if you like, and say that
i am not _angry_, but i’m _sorry_ to have lost her; especially as i can
never think she’ll be happy. it is out of the question my going to see
her, however: we are eternally divided; and should she really wish to
oblige me, let her persuade the villain she has married to leave the
country.”

“and you won’t write her a little note, sir?” i asked, imploringly.

“no,” he answered. “it is needless. my communication with heathcliff’s
family shall be as sparing as his with mine. it shall not exist!”

mr. edgar’s coldness depressed me exceedingly; and all the way from the
grange i puzzled my brains how to put more heart into what he said,
when i repeated it; and how to soften his refusal of even a few lines
to console isabella. i daresay she had been on the watch for me since
morning: i saw her looking through the lattice as i came up the garden
causeway, and i nodded to her; but she drew back, as if afraid of being
observed. i entered without knocking. there never was such a dreary,
dismal scene as the formerly cheerful house presented! i must confess,
that if i had been in the young lady’s place, i would, at least, have
swept the hearth, and wiped the tables with a duster. but she already
partook of the pervading spirit of neglect which encompassed her. her
pretty face was wan and listless; her hair uncurled: some locks hanging
lankly down, and some carelessly twisted round her head. probably she
had not touched her dress since yester evening. hindley was not there.
mr. heathcliff sat at a table, turning over some papers in his
pocket-book; but he rose when i appeared, asked me how i did, quite
friendly, and offered me a chair. he was the only thing there that
seemed decent; and i thought he never looked better. so much had
circumstances altered their positions, that he would certainly have
struck a stranger as a born and bred gentleman; and his wife as a
thorough little slattern! she came forward eagerly to greet me, and
held out one hand to take the expected letter. i shook my head. she
wouldn’t understand the hint, but followed me to a sideboard, where i
went to lay my bonnet, and importuned me in a whisper to give her
directly what i had brought. heathcliff guessed the meaning of her
manœuvres, and said—“if you have got anything for isabella (as no
doubt you have, nelly), give it to her. you needn’t make a secret of
it: we have no secrets between us.”

“oh, i have nothing,” i replied, thinking it best to speak the truth at
once. “my master bid me tell his sister that she must not expect either
a letter or a visit from him at present. he sends his love, ma’am, and
his wishes for your happiness, and his pardon for the grief you have
occasioned; but he thinks that after this time his household and the
household here should drop intercommunication, as nothing could come of
keeping it up.”

mrs. heathcliff’s lip quivered slightly, and she returned to her seat
in the window. her husband took his stand on the hearthstone, near me,
and began to put questions concerning catherine. i told him as much as
i thought proper of her illness, and he extorted from me, by
cross-examination, most of the facts connected with its origin. i
blamed her, as she deserved, for bringing it all on herself; and ended
by hoping that he would follow mr. linton’s example and avoid future
interference with his family, for good or evil.

“mrs. linton is now just recovering,” i said; “she’ll never be like she
was, but her life is spared; and if you really have a regard for her,
you’ll shun crossing her way again: nay, you’ll move out of this
country entirely; and that you may not regret it, i’ll inform you
catherine linton is as different now from your old friend catherine
earnshaw, as that young lady is different from me. her appearance is
changed greatly, her character much more so; and the person who is
compelled, of necessity, to be her companion, will only sustain his
affection hereafter by the remembrance of what she once was, by common
humanity, and a sense of duty!”

“that is quite possible,” remarked heathcliff, forcing himself to seem
calm: “quite possible that your master should have nothing but common
humanity and a sense of duty to fall back upon. but do you imagine that
i shall leave catherine to his _duty_ and _humanity_? and can you
compare my feelings respecting catherine to his? before you leave this
house, i must exact a promise from you that you’ll get me an interview
with her: consent, or refuse, i _will_ see her! what do you say?”

“i say, mr. heathcliff,” i replied, “you must not: you never shall,
through my means. another encounter between you and the master would
kill her altogether.”

“with your aid that may be avoided,” he continued; “and should there be
danger of such an event—should he be the cause of adding a single
trouble more to her existence—why, i think i shall be justified in
going to extremes! i wish you had sincerity enough to tell me whether
catherine would suffer greatly from his loss: the fear that she would
restrains me. and there you see the distinction between our feelings:
had he been in my place, and i in his, though i hated him with a hatred
that turned my life to gall, i never would have raised a hand against
him. you may look incredulous, if you please! i never would have
banished him from her society as long as she desired his. the moment
her regard ceased, i would have torn his heart out, and drunk his
blood! but, till then—if you don’t believe me, you don’t know me—till
then, i would have died by inches before i touched a single hair of his
head!”

“and yet,” i interrupted, “you have no scruples in completely ruining
all hopes of her perfect restoration, by thrusting yourself into her
remembrance now, when she has nearly forgotten you, and involving her
in a new tumult of discord and distress.”

“you suppose she has nearly forgotten me?” he said. “oh, nelly! you
know she has not! you know as well as i do, that for every thought she
spends on linton she spends a thousand on me! at a most miserable
period of my life, i had a notion of the kind: it haunted me on my
return to the neighbourhood last summer; but only her own assurance
could make me admit the horrible idea again. and then, linton would be
nothing, nor hindley, nor all the dreams that ever i dreamt. two words
would comprehend my future—_death_ and _hell_: existence, after losing
her, would be hell. yet i was a fool to fancy for a moment that she
valued edgar linton’s attachment more than mine. if he loved with all
the powers of his puny being, he couldn’t love as much in eighty years
as i could in a day. and catherine has a heart as deep as i have: the
sea could be as readily contained in that horse-trough as her whole
affection be monopolised by him. tush! he is scarcely a degree dearer
to her than her dog, or her horse. it is not in him to be loved like
me: how can she love in him what he has not?”

“catherine and edgar are as fond of each other as any two people can
be,” cried isabella, with sudden vivacity. “no one has a right to talk
in that manner, and i won’t hear my brother depreciated in silence!”

“your brother is wondrous fond of you too, isn’t he?” observed
heathcliff, scornfully. “he turns you adrift on the world with
surprising alacrity.”

“he is not aware of what i suffer,” she replied. “i didn’t tell him
that.”

“you have been telling him something, then: you have written, have
you?”

“to say that i was married, i did write—you saw the note.”

“and nothing since?”

“no.”

“my young lady is looking sadly the worse for her change of condition,”
i remarked. “somebody’s love comes short in her case, obviously; whose,
i may guess; but, perhaps, i shouldn’t say.”

“i should guess it was her own,” said heathcliff. “she degenerates into
a mere slut! she is tired of trying to please me uncommonly early.
you’d hardly credit it, but the very morrow of our wedding she was
weeping to go home. however, she’ll suit this house so much the better
for not being over nice, and i’ll take care she does not disgrace me by
rambling abroad.”

“well, sir,” returned i, “i hope you’ll consider that mrs. heathcliff
is accustomed to be looked after and waited on; and that she has been
brought up like an only daughter, whom every one was ready to serve.
you must let her have a maid to keep things tidy about her, and you
must treat her kindly. whatever be your notion of mr. edgar, you cannot
doubt that she has a capacity for strong attachments, or she wouldn’t
have abandoned the elegancies, and comforts, and friends of her former
home, to fix contentedly, in such a wilderness as this, with you.”

“she abandoned them under a delusion,” he answered; “picturing in me a
hero of romance, and expecting unlimited indulgences from my chivalrous
devotion. i can hardly regard her in the light of a rational creature,
so obstinately has she persisted in forming a fabulous notion of my
character and acting on the false impressions she cherished. but, at
last, i think she begins to know me: i don’t perceive the silly smiles
and grimaces that provoked me at first; and the senseless incapability
of discerning that i was in earnest when i gave her my opinion of her
infatuation and herself. it was a marvellous effort of perspicacity to
discover that i did not love her. i believed, at one time, no lessons
could teach her that! and yet it is poorly learnt; for this morning she
announced, as a piece of appalling intelligence, that i had actually
succeeded in making her hate me! a positive labour of hercules, i
assure you! if it be achieved, i have cause to return thanks. can i
trust your assertion, isabella? are you sure you hate me? if i let you
alone for half a day, won’t you come sighing and wheedling to me again?
i daresay she would rather i had seemed all tenderness before you: it
wounds her vanity to have the truth exposed. but i don’t care who knows
that the passion was wholly on one side: and i never told her a lie
about it. she cannot accuse me of showing one bit of deceitful
softness. the first thing she saw me do, on coming out of the grange,
was to hang up her little dog; and when she pleaded for it, the first
words i uttered were a wish that i had the hanging of every being
belonging to her, except one: possibly she took that exception for
herself. but no brutality disgusted her: i suppose she has an innate
admiration of it, if only her precious person were secure from injury!
now, was it not the depth of absurdity—of genuine idiocy, for that
pitiful, slavish, mean-minded brach to dream that i could love her?
tell your master, nelly, that i never, in all my life, met with such an
abject thing as she is. she even disgraces the name of linton; and i’ve
sometimes relented, from pure lack of invention, in my experiments on
what she could endure, and still creep shamefully cringing back! but
tell him, also, to set his fraternal and magisterial heart at ease:
that i keep strictly within the limits of the law. i have avoided, up
to this period, giving her the slightest right to claim a separation;
and, what’s more, she’d thank nobody for dividing us. if she desired to
go, she might: the nuisance of her presence outweighs the gratification
to be derived from tormenting her!”

“mr. heathcliff,” said i, “this is the talk of a madman; your wife,
most likely, is convinced you are mad; and, for that reason, she has
borne with you hitherto: but now that you say she may go, she’ll
doubtless avail herself of the permission. you are not so bewitched,
ma’am, are you, as to remain with him of your own accord?”

“take care, ellen!” answered isabella, her eyes sparkling irefully;
there was no misdoubting by their expression the full success of her
partner’s endeavours to make himself detested. “don’t put faith in a
single word he speaks. he’s a lying fiend! a monster, and not a human
being! i’ve been told i might leave him before; and i’ve made the
attempt, but i dare not repeat it! only, ellen, promise you’ll not
mention a syllable of his infamous conversation to my brother or
catherine. whatever he may pretend, he wishes to provoke edgar to
desperation: he says he has married me on purpose to obtain power over
him; and he sha’n’t obtain it—i’ll die first! i just hope, i pray, that
he may forget his diabolical prudence and kill me! the single pleasure
i can imagine is to die, or to see him dead!”

“there—that will do for the present!” said heathcliff. “if you are
called upon in a court of law, you’ll remember her language, nelly! and
take a good look at that countenance: she’s near the point which would
suit me. no; you’re not fit to be your own guardian, isabella, now; and
i, being your legal protector, must retain you in my custody, however
distasteful the obligation may be. go upstairs; i have something to say
to ellen dean in private. that’s not the way: upstairs, i tell you!
why, this is the road upstairs, child!”

he seized, and thrust her from the room; and returned muttering—“i have
no pity! i have no pity! the more the worms writhe, the more i yearn to
crush out their entrails! it is a moral teething; and i grind with
greater energy in proportion to the increase of pain.”

“do you understand what the word pity means?” i said, hastening to
resume my bonnet. “did you ever feel a touch of it in your life?”

“put that down!” he interrupted, perceiving my intention to depart.
“you are not going yet. come here now, nelly: i must either persuade or
compel you to aid me in fulfilling my determination to see catherine,
and that without delay. i swear that i meditate no harm: i don’t desire
to cause any disturbance, or to exasperate or insult mr. linton; i only
wish to hear from herself how she is, and why she has been ill; and to
ask if anything that i could do would be of use to her. last night i
was in the grange garden six hours, and i’ll return there to-night; and
every night i’ll haunt the place, and every day, till i find an
opportunity of entering. if edgar linton meets me, i shall not hesitate
to knock him down, and give him enough to insure his quiescence while i
stay. if his servants oppose me, i shall threaten them off with these
pistols. but wouldn’t it be better to prevent my coming in contact with
them, or their master? and you could do it so easily. i’d warn you when
i came, and then you might let me in unobserved, as soon as she was
alone, and watch till i departed, your conscience quite calm: you would
be hindering mischief.”

i protested against playing that treacherous part in my employer’s
house: and, besides, i urged the cruelty and selfishness of his
destroying mrs. linton’s tranquillity for his satisfaction. “the
commonest occurrence startles her painfully,” i said. “she’s all
nerves, and she couldn’t bear the surprise, i’m positive. don’t
persist, sir! or else i shall be obliged to inform my master of your
designs; and he’ll take measures to secure his house and its inmates
from any such unwarrantable intrusions!”

“in that case i’ll take measures to secure you, woman!” exclaimed
heathcliff; “you shall not leave wuthering heights till to-morrow
morning. it is a foolish story to assert that catherine could not bear
to see me; and as to surprising her, i don’t desire it: you must
prepare her—ask her if i may come. you say she never mentions my name,
and that i am never mentioned to her. to whom should she mention me if
i am a forbidden topic in the house? she thinks you are all spies for
her husband. oh, i’ve no doubt she’s in hell among you! i guess by her
silence, as much as anything, what she feels. you say she is often
restless, and anxious-looking: is that a proof of tranquillity? you
talk of her mind being unsettled. how the devil could it be otherwise
in her frightful isolation? and that insipid, paltry creature attending
her from _duty_ and _humanity_! from _pity_ and _charity_! he might as
well plant an oak in a flower-pot, and expect it to thrive, as imagine
he can restore her to vigour in the soil of his shallow cares! let us
settle it at once: will you stay here, and am i to fight my way to
catherine over linton and his footman? or will you be my friend, as you
have been hitherto, and do what i request? decide! because there is no
reason for my lingering another minute, if you persist in your stubborn
ill-nature!”

well, mr. lockwood, i argued and complained, and flatly refused him
fifty times; but in the long run he forced me to an agreement. i
engaged to carry a letter from him to my mistress; and should she
consent, i promised to let him have intelligence of linton’s next
absence from home, when he might come, and get in as he was able: i
wouldn’t be there, and my fellow-servants should be equally out of the
way. was it right or wrong? i fear it was wrong, though expedient. i
thought i prevented another explosion by my compliance; and i thought,
too, it might create a favourable crisis in catherine’s mental illness:
and then i remembered mr. edgar’s stern rebuke of my carrying tales;
and i tried to smooth away all disquietude on the subject, by
affirming, with frequent iteration, that that betrayal of trust, if it
merited so harsh an appellation, should be the last. notwithstanding,
my journey homeward was sadder than my journey thither; and many
misgivings i had, ere i could prevail on myself to put the missive into
mrs. linton’s hand.

but here is kenneth; i’ll go down, and tell him how much better you
are. my history is _dree_, as we say, and will serve to while away
another morning.

* * * * *


dree, and dreary! i reflected as the good woman descended to receive
the doctor: and not exactly of the kind which i should have chosen to
amuse me. but never mind! i’ll extract wholesome medicines from mrs.
dean’s bitter herbs; and firstly, let me beware of the fascination that
lurks in catherine heathcliff’s brilliant eyes. i should be in a
curious taking if i surrendered my heart to that young person, and the
daughter turned out a second edition of the mother.




chapter xv


another week over—and i am so many days nearer health, and spring! i
have now heard all my neighbour’s history, at different sittings, as
the housekeeper could spare time from more important occupations. i’ll
continue it in her own words, only a little condensed. she is, on the
whole, a very fair narrator, and i don’t think i could improve her
style.

* * * * *


in the evening, she said, the evening of my visit to the heights, i
knew, as well as if i saw him, that mr. heathcliff was about the place;
and i shunned going out, because i still carried his letter in my
pocket, and didn’t want to be threatened or teased any more. i had made
up my mind not to give it till my master went somewhere, as i could not
guess how its receipt would affect catherine. the consequence was, that
it did not reach her before the lapse of three days. the fourth was
sunday, and i brought it into her room after the family were gone to
church. there was a man servant left to keep the house with me, and we
generally made a practice of locking the doors during the hours of
service; but on that occasion the weather was so warm and pleasant that
i set them wide open, and, to fulfil my engagement, as i knew who would
be coming, i told my companion that the mistress wished very much for
some oranges, and he must run over to the village and get a few, to be
paid for on the morrow. he departed, and i went upstairs.

mrs. linton sat in a loose white dress, with a light shawl over her
shoulders, in the recess of the open window, as usual. her thick, long
hair had been partly removed at the beginning of her illness, and now
she wore it simply combed in its natural tresses over her temples and
neck. her appearance was altered, as i had told heathcliff; but when
she was calm, there seemed unearthly beauty in the change. the flash of
her eyes had been succeeded by a dreamy and melancholy softness; they
no longer gave the impression of looking at the objects around her:
they appeared always to gaze beyond, and far beyond—you would have said
out of this world. then, the paleness of her face—its haggard aspect
having vanished as she recovered flesh—and the peculiar expression
arising from her mental state, though painfully suggestive of their
causes, added to the touching interest which she awakened;
and—invariably to me, i know, and to any person who saw her, i should
think—refuted more tangible proofs of convalescence, and stamped her as
one doomed to decay.

a book lay spread on the sill before her, and the scarcely perceptible
wind fluttered its leaves at intervals. i believe linton had laid it
there: for she never endeavoured to divert herself with reading, or
occupation of any kind, and he would spend many an hour in trying to
entice her attention to some subject which had formerly been her
amusement. she was conscious of his aim, and in her better moods
endured his efforts placidly, only showing their uselessness by now and
then suppressing a wearied sigh, and checking him at last with the
saddest of smiles and kisses. at other times, she would turn petulantly
away, and hide her face in her hands, or even push him off angrily; and
then he took care to let her alone, for he was certain of doing no
good.

gimmerton chapel bells were still ringing; and the full, mellow flow of
the beck in the valley came soothingly on the ear. it was a sweet
substitute for the yet absent murmur of the summer foliage, which
drowned that music about the grange when the trees were in leaf. at
wuthering heights it always sounded on quiet days following a great
thaw or a season of steady rain. and of wuthering heights catherine was
thinking as she listened: that is, if she thought or listened at all;
but she had the vague, distant look i mentioned before, which expressed
no recognition of material things either by ear or eye.

“there’s a letter for you, mrs. linton,” i said, gently inserting it in
one hand that rested on her knee. “you must read it immediately,
because it wants an answer. shall i break the seal?” “yes,” she
answered, without altering the direction of her eyes. i opened it—it
was very short. “now,” i continued, “read it.” she drew away her hand,
and let it fall. i replaced it in her lap, and stood waiting till it
should please her to glance down; but that movement was so long delayed
that at last i resumed—“must i read it, ma’am? it is from mr.
heathcliff.”

there was a start and a troubled gleam of recollection, and a struggle
to arrange her ideas. she lifted the letter, and seemed to peruse it;
and when she came to the signature she sighed: yet still i found she
had not gathered its import, for, upon my desiring to hear her reply,
she merely pointed to the name, and gazed at me with mournful and
questioning eagerness.

“well, he wishes to see you,” said i, guessing her need of an
interpreter. “he’s in the garden by this time, and impatient to know
what answer i shall bring.”

as i spoke, i observed a large dog lying on the sunny grass beneath
raise its ears as if about to bark, and then smoothing them back,
announce, by a wag of the tail, that some one approached whom it did
not consider a stranger. mrs. linton bent forward, and listened
breathlessly. the minute after a step traversed the hall; the open
house was too tempting for heathcliff to resist walking in: most likely
he supposed that i was inclined to shirk my promise, and so resolved to
trust to his own audacity. with straining eagerness catherine gazed
towards the entrance of her chamber. he did not hit the right room
directly: she motioned me to admit him, but he found it out ere i could
reach the door, and in a stride or two was at her side, and had her
grasped in his arms.

he neither spoke nor loosed his hold for some five minutes, during
which period he bestowed more kisses than ever he gave in his life
before, i daresay: but then my mistress had kissed him first, and i
plainly saw that he could hardly bear, for downright agony, to look
into her face! the same conviction had stricken him as me, from the
instant he beheld her, that there was no prospect of ultimate recovery
there—she was fated, sure to die.

“oh, cathy! oh, my life! how can i bear it?” was the first sentence he
uttered, in a tone that did not seek to disguise his despair. and now
he stared at her so earnestly that i thought the very intensity of his
gaze would bring tears into his eyes; but they burned with anguish:
they did not melt.

“what now?” said catherine, leaning back, and returning his look with a
suddenly clouded brow: her humour was a mere vane for constantly
varying caprices. “you and edgar have broken my heart, heathcliff! and
you both come to bewail the deed to me, as if you were the people to be
pitied! i shall not pity you, not i. you have killed me—and thriven on
it, i think. how strong you are! how many years do you mean to live
after i am gone?”

heathcliff had knelt on one knee to embrace her; he attempted to rise,
but she seized his hair, and kept him down.

“i wish i could hold you,” she continued, bitterly, “till we were both
dead! i shouldn’t care what you suffered. i care nothing for your
sufferings. why shouldn’t you suffer? i do! will you forget me? will
you be happy when i am in the earth? will you say twenty years hence,
‘that’s the grave of catherine earnshaw? i loved her long ago, and was
wretched to lose her; but it is past. i’ve loved many others since: my
children are dearer to me than she was; and, at death, i shall not
rejoice that i am going to her: i shall be sorry that i must leave
them!’ will you say so, heathcliff?”

“don’t torture me till i’m as mad as yourself,” cried he, wrenching his
head free, and grinding his teeth.

the two, to a cool spectator, made a strange and fearful picture. well
might catherine deem that heaven would be a land of exile to her,
unless with her mortal body she cast away her moral character also. her
present countenance had a wild vindictiveness in its white cheek, and a
bloodless lip and scintillating eye; and she retained in her closed
fingers a portion of the locks she had been grasping. as to her
companion, while raising himself with one hand, he had taken her arm
with the other; and so inadequate was his stock of gentleness to the
requirements of her condition, that on his letting go i saw four
distinct impressions left blue in the colourless skin.

“are you possessed with a devil,” he pursued, savagely, “to talk in
that manner to me when you are dying? do you reflect that all those
words will be branded in my memory, and eating deeper eternally after
you have left me? you know you lie to say i have killed you: and,
catherine, you know that i could as soon forget you as my existence! is
it not sufficient for your infernal selfishness, that while you are at
peace i shall writhe in the torments of hell?”

“i shall not be at peace,” moaned catherine, recalled to a sense of
physical weakness by the violent, unequal throbbing of her heart, which
beat visibly and audibly under this excess of agitation. she said
nothing further till the paroxysm was over; then she continued, more
kindly—

“i’m not wishing you greater torment than i have, heathcliff. i only
wish us never to be parted: and should a word of mine distress you
hereafter, think i feel the same distress underground, and for my own
sake, forgive me! come here and kneel down again! you never harmed me
in your life. nay, if you nurse anger, that will be worse to remember
than my harsh words! won’t you come here again? do!”

heathcliff went to the back of her chair, and leant over, but not so
far as to let her see his face, which was livid with emotion. she bent
round to look at him; he would not permit it: turning abruptly, he
walked to the fireplace, where he stood, silent, with his back towards
us. mrs. linton’s glance followed him suspiciously: every movement woke
a new sentiment in her. after a pause and a prolonged gaze, she
resumed; addressing me in accents of indignant disappointment:—

“oh, you see, nelly, he would not relent a moment to keep me out of the
grave. _that_ is how i’m loved! well, never mind. that is not _my_
heathcliff. i shall love mine yet; and take him with me: he’s in my
soul. and,” added she musingly, “the thing that irks me most is this
shattered prison, after all. i’m tired of being enclosed here. i’m
wearying to escape into that glorious world, and to be always there:
not seeing it dimly through tears, and yearning for it through the
walls of an aching heart: but really with it, and in it. nelly, you
think you are better and more fortunate than i; in full health and
strength: you are sorry for me—very soon that will be altered. i shall
be sorry for _you_. i shall be incomparably beyond and above you all. i
_wonder_ he won’t be near me!” she went on to herself. “i thought he
wished it. heathcliff, dear! you should not be sullen now. do come to
me, heathcliff.”

in her eagerness she rose and supported herself on the arm of the
chair. at that earnest appeal he turned to her, looking absolutely
desperate. his eyes, wide and wet, at last flashed fiercely on her; his
breast heaved convulsively. an instant they held asunder, and then how
they met i hardly saw, but catherine made a spring, and he caught her,
and they were locked in an embrace from which i thought my mistress
would never be released alive: in fact, to my eyes, she seemed directly
insensible. he flung himself into the nearest seat, and on my
approaching hurriedly to ascertain if she had fainted, he gnashed at
me, and foamed like a mad dog, and gathered her to him with greedy
jealousy. i did not feel as if i were in the company of a creature of
my own species: it appeared that he would not understand, though i
spoke to him; so i stood off, and held my tongue, in great perplexity.

a movement of catherine’s relieved me a little presently: she put up
her hand to clasp his neck, and bring her cheek to his as he held her;
while he, in return, covering her with frantic caresses, said wildly—

“you teach me now how cruel you’ve been—cruel and false. _why_ did you
despise me? _why_ did you betray your own heart, cathy? i have not one
word of comfort. you deserve this. you have killed yourself. yes, you
may kiss me, and cry; and wring out my kisses and tears: they’ll blight
you—they’ll damn you. you loved me—then what _right_ had you to leave
me? what right—answer me—for the poor fancy you felt for linton?
because misery and degradation, and death, and nothing that god or
satan could inflict would have parted us, _you_, of your own will, did
it. i have not broken your heart—_you_ have broken it; and in breaking
it, you have broken mine. so much the worse for me that i am strong. do
i want to live? what kind of living will it be when you—oh, god! would
_you_ like to live with your soul in the grave?”

“let me alone. let me alone,” sobbed catherine. “if i’ve done wrong,
i’m dying for it. it is enough! you left me too: but i won’t upbraid
you! i forgive you. forgive me!”

“it is hard to forgive, and to look at those eyes, and feel those
wasted hands,” he answered. “kiss me again; and don’t let me see your
eyes! i forgive what you have done to me. i love _my_ murderer—but
_yours_! how can i?”

they were silent—their faces hid against each other, and washed by each
other’s tears. at least, i suppose the weeping was on both sides; as it
seemed heathcliff _could_ weep on a great occasion like this.

i grew very uncomfortable, meanwhile; for the afternoon wore fast away,
the man whom i had sent off returned from his errand, and i could
distinguish, by the shine of the western sun up the valley, a concourse
thickening outside gimmerton chapel porch.

“service is over,” i announced. “my master will be here in half an
hour.”

heathcliff groaned a curse, and strained catherine closer: she never
moved.

ere long i perceived a group of the servants passing up the road
towards the kitchen wing. mr. linton was not far behind; he opened the
gate himself and sauntered slowly up, probably enjoying the lovely
afternoon that breathed as soft as summer.

“now he is here,” i exclaimed. “for heaven’s sake, hurry down! you’ll
not meet any one on the front stairs. do be quick; and stay among the
trees till he is fairly in.”

“i must go, cathy,” said heathcliff, seeking to extricate himself from
his companion’s arms. “but if i live, i’ll see you again before you are
asleep. i won’t stray five yards from your window.”

“you must not go!” she answered, holding him as firmly as her strength
allowed. “you _shall_ not, i tell you.”

“for one hour,” he pleaded earnestly.

“not for one minute,” she replied.

“i _must_—linton will be up immediately,” persisted the alarmed
intruder.

he would have risen, and unfixed her fingers by the act—she clung fast,
gasping: there was mad resolution in her face.

“no!” she shrieked. “oh, don’t, don’t go. it is the last time! edgar
will not hurt us. heathcliff, i shall die! i shall die!”

“damn the fool! there he is,” cried heathcliff, sinking back into his
seat. “hush, my darling! hush, hush, catherine! i’ll stay. if he shot
me so, i’d expire with a blessing on my lips.”

and there they were fast again. i heard my master mounting the
stairs—the cold sweat ran from my forehead: i was horrified.

“are you going to listen to her ravings?” i said, passionately. “she
does not know what she says. will you ruin her, because she has not wit
to help herself? get up! you could be free instantly. that is the most
diabolical deed that ever you did. we are all done for—master,
mistress, and servant.”

i wrung my hands, and cried out; and mr. linton hastened his step at
the noise. in the midst of my agitation, i was sincerely glad to
observe that catherine’s arms had fallen relaxed, and her head hung
down.

“she’s fainted, or dead,” i thought: “so much the better. far better
that she should be dead, than lingering a burden and a misery-maker to
all about her.”

edgar sprang to his unbidden guest, blanched with astonishment and
rage. what he meant to do i cannot tell; however, the other stopped all
demonstrations, at once, by placing the lifeless-looking form in his
arms.

“look there!” he said. “unless you be a fiend, help her first—then you
shall speak to me!”

he walked into the parlour, and sat down. mr. linton summoned me, and
with great difficulty, and after resorting to many means, we managed to
restore her to sensation; but she was all bewildered; she sighed, and
moaned, and knew nobody. edgar, in his anxiety for her, forgot her
hated friend. i did not. i went, at the earliest opportunity, and
besought him to depart; affirming that catherine was better, and he
should hear from me in the morning how she passed the night.

“i shall not refuse to go out of doors,” he answered; “but i shall stay
in the garden: and, nelly, mind you keep your word to-morrow. i shall
be under those larch-trees. mind! or i pay another visit, whether
linton be in or not.”

he sent a rapid glance through the half-open door of the chamber, and,
ascertaining that what i stated was apparently true, delivered the
house of his luckless presence.




chapter xvi


about twelve o’clock that night was born the catherine you saw at
wuthering heights: a puny, seven-months’ child; and two hours after the
mother died, having never recovered sufficient consciousness to miss
heathcliff, or know edgar. the latter’s distraction at his bereavement
is a subject too painful to be dwelt on; its after-effects showed how
deep the sorrow sunk. a great addition, in my eyes, was his being left
without an heir. i bemoaned that, as i gazed on the feeble orphan; and
i mentally abused old linton for (what was only natural partiality) the
securing his estate to his own daughter, instead of his son’s. an
unwelcomed infant it was, poor thing! it might have wailed out of life,
and nobody cared a morsel, during those first hours of existence. we
redeemed the neglect afterwards; but its beginning was as friendless as
its end is likely to be.

next morning—bright and cheerful out of doors—stole softened in through
the blinds of the silent room, and suffused the couch and its occupant
with a mellow, tender glow. edgar linton had his head laid on the
pillow, and his eyes shut. his young and fair features were almost as
deathlike as those of the form beside him, and almost as fixed: but
_his_ was the hush of exhausted anguish, and _hers_ of perfect peace.
her brow smooth, her lids closed, her lips wearing the expression of a
smile; no angel in heaven could be more beautiful than she appeared.
and i partook of the infinite calm in which she lay: my mind was never
in a holier frame than while i gazed on that untroubled image of divine
rest. i instinctively echoed the words she had uttered a few hours
before: “incomparably beyond and above us all! whether still on earth
or now in heaven, her spirit is at home with god!”

i don’t know if it be a peculiarity in me, but i am seldom otherwise
than happy while watching in the chamber of death, should no frenzied
or despairing mourner share the duty with me. i see a repose that
neither earth nor hell can break, and i feel an assurance of the
endless and shadowless hereafter—the eternity they have entered—where
life is boundless in its duration, and love in its sympathy, and joy in
its fulness. i noticed on that occasion how much selfishness there is
even in a love like mr. linton’s, when he so regretted catherine’s
blessed release! to be sure, one might have doubted, after the wayward
and impatient existence she had led, whether she merited a haven of
peace at last. one might doubt in seasons of cold reflection; but not
then, in the presence of her corpse. it asserted its own tranquillity,
which seemed a pledge of equal quiet to its former inhabitant.

do you believe such people _are_ happy in the other world, sir? i’d
give a great deal to know.

i declined answering mrs. dean’s question, which struck me as something
heterodox. she proceeded:

retracing the course of catherine linton, i fear we have no right to
think she is; but we’ll leave her with her maker.

the master looked asleep, and i ventured soon after sunrise to quit the
room and steal out to the pure refreshing air. the servants thought me
gone to shake off the drowsiness of my protracted watch; in reality, my
chief motive was seeing mr. heathcliff. if he had remained among the
larches all night, he would have heard nothing of the stir at the
grange; unless, perhaps, he might catch the gallop of the messenger
going to gimmerton. if he had come nearer, he would probably be aware,
from the lights flitting to and fro, and the opening and shutting of
the outer doors, that all was not right within. i wished, yet feared,
to find him. i felt the terrible news must be told, and i longed to get
it over; but _how_ to do it i did not know. he was there—at least, a
few yards further in the park; leant against an old ash-tree, his hat
off, and his hair soaked with the dew that had gathered on the budded
branches, and fell pattering round him. he had been standing a long
time in that position, for i saw a pair of ousels passing and repassing
scarcely three feet from him, busy in building their nest, and
regarding his proximity no more than that of a piece of timber. they
flew off at my approach, and he raised his eyes and spoke:—“she’s
dead!” he said; “i’ve not waited for you to learn that. put your
handkerchief away—don’t snivel before me. damn you all! she wants none
of _your_ tears!”

i was weeping as much for him as her: we do sometimes pity creatures
that have none of the feeling either for themselves or others. when i
first looked into his face, i perceived that he had got intelligence of
the catastrophe; and a foolish notion struck me that his heart was
quelled and he prayed, because his lips moved and his gaze was bent on
the ground.

“yes, she’s dead!” i answered, checking my sobs and drying my cheeks.
“gone to heaven, i hope; where we may, every one, join her, if we take
due warning and leave our evil ways to follow good!”

“did _she_ take due warning, then?” asked heathcliff, attempting a
sneer. “did she die like a saint? come, give me a true history of the
event. how did—?”

he endeavoured to pronounce the name, but could not manage it; and
compressing his mouth he held a silent combat with his inward agony,
defying, meanwhile, my sympathy with an unflinching, ferocious stare.
“how did she die?” he resumed, at last—fain, notwithstanding his
hardihood, to have a support behind him; for, after the struggle, he
trembled, in spite of himself, to his very finger-ends.

“poor wretch!” i thought; “you have a heart and nerves the same as your
brother men! why should you be anxious to conceal them? your pride
cannot blind god! you tempt him to wring them, till he forces a cry of
humiliation.”

“quietly as a lamb!” i answered, aloud. “she drew a sigh, and stretched
herself, like a child reviving, and sinking again to sleep; and five
minutes after i felt one little pulse at her heart, and nothing more!”

“and—did she ever mention me?” he asked, hesitating, as if he dreaded
the answer to his question would introduce details that he could not
bear to hear.

“her senses never returned: she recognised nobody from the time you
left her,” i said. “she lies with a sweet smile on her face; and her
latest ideas wandered back to pleasant early days. her life closed in a
gentle dream—may she wake as kindly in the other world!”

“may she wake in torment!” he cried, with frightful vehemence, stamping
his foot, and groaning in a sudden paroxysm of ungovernable passion.
“why, she’s a liar to the end! where is she? not _there_—not in
heaven—not perished—where? oh! you said you cared nothing for my
sufferings! and i pray one prayer—i repeat it till my tongue
stiffens—catherine earnshaw, may you not rest as long as i am living;
you said i killed you—haunt me, then! the murdered _do_ haunt their
murderers, i believe. i know that ghosts _have_ wandered on earth. be
with me always—take any form—drive me mad! only _do_ not leave me in
this abyss, where i cannot find you! oh, god! it is unutterable! i
_cannot_ live without my life! i _cannot_ live without my soul!”

he dashed his head against the knotted trunk; and, lifting up his eyes,
howled, not like a man, but like a savage beast being goaded to death
with knives and spears. i observed several splashes of blood about the
bark of the tree, and his hand and forehead were both stained; probably
the scene i witnessed was a repetition of others acted during the
night. it hardly moved my compassion—it appalled me: still, i felt
reluctant to quit him so. but the moment he recollected himself enough
to notice me watching, he thundered a command for me to go, and i
obeyed. he was beyond my skill to quiet or console!

mrs. linton’s funeral was appointed to take place on the friday
following her decease; and till then her coffin remained uncovered, and
strewn with flowers and scented leaves, in the great drawing-room.
linton spent his days and nights there, a sleepless guardian; and—a
circumstance concealed from all but me—heathcliff spent his nights, at
least, outside, equally a stranger to repose. i held no communication
with him; still, i was conscious of his design to enter, if he could;
and on the tuesday, a little after dark, when my master, from sheer
fatigue, had been compelled to retire a couple of hours, i went and
opened one of the windows; moved by his perseverance to give him a
chance of bestowing on the faded image of his idol one final adieu. he
did not omit to avail himself of the opportunity, cautiously and
briefly; too cautiously to betray his presence by the slightest noise.
indeed, i shouldn’t have discovered that he had been there, except for
the disarrangement of the drapery about the corpse’s face, and for
observing on the floor a curl of light hair, fastened with a silver
thread; which, on examination, i ascertained to have been taken from a
locket hung round catherine’s neck. heathcliff had opened the trinket
and cast out its contents, replacing them by a black lock of his own. i
twisted the two, and enclosed them together.

mr. earnshaw was, of course, invited to attend the remains of his
sister to the grave; he sent no excuse, but he never came; so that,
besides her husband, the mourners were wholly composed of tenants and
servants. isabella was not asked.

the place of catherine’s interment, to the surprise of the villagers,
was neither in the chapel under the carved monument of the lintons, nor
yet by the tombs of her own relations, outside. it was dug on a green
slope in a corner of the kirkyard, where the wall is so low that heath
and bilberry-plants have climbed over it from the moor; and peat-mould
almost buries it. her husband lies in the same spot now; and they have
each a simple headstone above, and a plain grey block at their feet, to
mark the graves.




chapter xvii


that friday made the last of our fine days for a month. in the evening
the weather broke: the wind shifted from south to north-east, and
brought rain first, and then sleet and snow. on the morrow one could
hardly imagine that there had been three weeks of summer: the primroses
and crocuses were hidden under wintry drifts; the larks were silent,
the young leaves of the early trees smitten and blackened. and dreary,
and chill, and dismal, that morrow did creep over! my master kept his
room; i took possession of the lonely parlour, converting it into a
nursery: and there i was, sitting with the moaning doll of a child laid
on my knee; rocking it to and fro, and watching, meanwhile, the still
driving flakes build up the uncurtained window, when the door opened,
and some person entered, out of breath and laughing! my anger was
greater than my astonishment for a minute. i supposed it one of the
maids, and i cried—“have done! how dare you show your giddiness here?
what would mr. linton say if he heard you?”

“excuse me!” answered a familiar voice; “but i know edgar is in bed,
and i cannot stop myself.”

with that the speaker came forward to the fire, panting and holding her
hand to her side.

“i have run the whole way from wuthering heights!” she continued, after
a pause; “except where i’ve flown. i couldn’t count the number of falls
i’ve had. oh, i’m aching all over! don’t be alarmed! there shall be an
explanation as soon as i can give it; only just have the goodness to
step out and order the carriage to take me on to gimmerton, and tell a
servant to seek up a few clothes in my wardrobe.”

the intruder was mrs. heathcliff. she certainly seemed in no laughing
predicament: her hair streamed on her shoulders, dripping with snow and
water; she was dressed in the girlish dress she commonly wore,
befitting her age more than her position: a low frock with short
sleeves, and nothing on either head or neck. the frock was of light
silk, and clung to her with wet, and her feet were protected merely by
thin slippers; add to this a deep cut under one ear, which only the
cold prevented from bleeding profusely, a white face scratched and
bruised, and a frame hardly able to support itself through fatigue; and
you may fancy my first fright was not much allayed when i had had
leisure to examine her.

“my dear young lady,” i exclaimed, “i’ll stir nowhere, and hear
nothing, till you have removed every article of your clothes, and put
on dry things; and certainly you shall not go to gimmerton to-night, so
it is needless to order the carriage.”

“certainly i shall,” she said; “walking or riding: yet i’ve no
objection to dress myself decently. and—ah, see how it flows down my
neck now! the fire does make it smart.”

she insisted on my fulfilling her directions, before she would let me
touch her; and not till after the coachman had been instructed to get
ready, and a maid set to pack up some necessary attire, did i obtain
her consent for binding the wound and helping to change her garments.

“now, ellen,” she said, when my task was finished and she was seated in
an easy-chair on the hearth, with a cup of tea before her, “you sit
down opposite me, and put poor catherine’s baby away: i don’t like to
see it! you mustn’t think i care little for catherine, because i
behaved so foolishly on entering: i’ve cried, too, bitterly—yes, more
than any one else has reason to cry. we parted unreconciled, you
remember, and i sha’n’t forgive myself. but, for all that, i was not
going to sympathise with him—the brute beast! oh, give me the poker!
this is the last thing of his i have about me:” she slipped the gold
ring from her third finger, and threw it on the floor. “i’ll smash it!”
she continued, striking it with childish spite, “and then i’ll burn
it!” and she took and dropped the misused article among the coals.
“there! he shall buy another, if he gets me back again. he’d be capable
of coming to seek me, to tease edgar. i dare not stay, lest that notion
should possess his wicked head! and besides, edgar has not been kind,
has he? and i won’t come suing for his assistance; nor will i bring him
into more trouble. necessity compelled me to seek shelter here; though,
if i had not learned he was out of the way, i’d have halted at the
kitchen, washed my face, warmed myself, got you to bring what i wanted,
and departed again to anywhere out of the reach of my accursed—of that
incarnate goblin! ah, he was in such a fury! if he had caught me! it’s
a pity earnshaw is not his match in strength: i wouldn’t have run till
i’d seen him all but demolished, had hindley been able to do it!”

“well, don’t talk so fast, miss!” i interrupted; “you’ll disorder the
handkerchief i have tied round your face, and make the cut bleed again.
drink your tea, and take breath, and give over laughing: laughter is
sadly out of place under this roof, and in your condition!”

“an undeniable truth,” she replied. “listen to that child! it maintains
a constant wail—send it out of my hearing for an hour; i sha’n’t stay
any longer.”

i rang the bell, and committed it to a servant’s care; and then i
inquired what had urged her to escape from wuthering heights in such an
unlikely plight, and where she meant to go, as she refused remaining
with us.

“i ought, and i wished to remain,” answered she, “to cheer edgar and
take care of the baby, for two things, and because the grange is my
right home. but i tell you he wouldn’t let me! do you think he could
bear to see me grow fat and merry—could bear to think that we were
tranquil, and not resolve on poisoning our comfort? now, i have the
satisfaction of being sure that he detests me, to the point of its
annoying him seriously to have me within ear-shot or eyesight: i
notice, when i enter his presence, the muscles of his countenance are
involuntarily distorted into an expression of hatred; partly arising
from his knowledge of the good causes i have to feel that sentiment for
him, and partly from original aversion. it is strong enough to make me
feel pretty certain that he would not chase me over england, supposing
i contrived a clear escape; and therefore i must get quite away. i’ve
recovered from my first desire to be killed by him: i’d rather he’d
kill himself! he has extinguished my love effectually, and so i’m at my
ease. i can recollect yet how i loved him; and can dimly imagine that i
could still be loving him, if—no, no! even if he had doted on me, the
devilish nature would have revealed its existence somehow. catherine
had an awfully perverted taste to esteem him so dearly, knowing him so
well. monster! would that he could be blotted out of creation, and out
of my memory!”

“hush, hush! he’s a human being,” i said. “be more charitable: there
are worse men than he is yet!”

“he’s not a human being,” she retorted; “and he has no claim on my
charity. i gave him my heart, and he took and pinched it to death, and
flung it back to me. people feel with their hearts, ellen: and since he
has destroyed mine, i have not power to feel for him: and i would not,
though he groaned from this to his dying day, and wept tears of blood
for catherine! no, indeed, indeed, i wouldn’t!” and here isabella began
to cry; but, immediately dashing the water from her lashes, she
recommenced. “you asked, what has driven me to flight at last? i was
compelled to attempt it, because i had succeeded in rousing his rage a
pitch above his malignity. pulling out the nerves with red hot pincers
requires more coolness than knocking on the head. he was worked up to
forget the fiendish prudence he boasted of, and proceeded to murderous
violence. i experienced pleasure in being able to exasperate him: the
sense of pleasure woke my instinct of self-preservation, so i fairly
broke free; and if ever i come into his hands again he is welcome to a
signal revenge.

“yesterday, you know, mr. earnshaw should have been at the funeral. he
kept himself sober for the purpose—tolerably sober: not going to bed
mad at six o’clock and getting up drunk at twelve. consequently, he
rose, in suicidal low spirits, as fit for the church as for a dance;
and instead, he sat down by the fire and swallowed gin or brandy by
tumblerfuls.

“heathcliff—i shudder to name him! has been a stranger in the house
from last sunday till to-day. whether the angels have fed him, or his
kin beneath, i cannot tell; but he has not eaten a meal with us for
nearly a week. he has just come home at dawn, and gone upstairs to his
chamber; locking himself in—as if anybody dreamt of coveting his
company! there he has continued, praying like a methodist: only the
deity he implored is senseless dust and ashes; and god, when addressed,
was curiously confounded with his own black father! after concluding
these precious orisons—and they lasted generally till he grew hoarse
and his voice was strangled in his throat—he would be off again; always
straight down to the grange! i wonder edgar did not send for a
constable, and give him into custody! for me, grieved as i was about
catherine, it was impossible to avoid regarding this season of
deliverance from degrading oppression as a holiday.

“i recovered spirits sufficient to hear joseph’s eternal lectures
without weeping, and to move up and down the house less with the foot
of a frightened thief than formerly. you wouldn’t think that i should
cry at anything joseph could say; but he and hareton are detestable
companions. i’d rather sit with hindley, and hear his awful talk, than
with ‘t’ little maister’ and his staunch supporter, that odious old
man! when heathcliff is in, i’m often obliged to seek the kitchen and
their society, or starve among the damp uninhabited chambers; when he
is not, as was the case this week, i establish a table and chair at one
corner of the house fire, and never mind how mr. earnshaw may occupy
himself; and he does not interfere with my arrangements. he is quieter
now than he used to be, if no one provokes him: more sullen and
depressed, and less furious. joseph affirms he’s sure he’s an altered
man: that the lord has touched his heart, and he is saved ‘so as by
fire.’ i’m puzzled to detect signs of the favourable change: but it is
not my business.

“yester-evening i sat in my nook reading some old books till late on
towards twelve. it seemed so dismal to go upstairs, with the wild snow
blowing outside, and my thoughts continually reverting to the kirkyard
and the new-made grave! i dared hardly lift my eyes from the page
before me, that melancholy scene so instantly usurped its place.
hindley sat opposite, his head leant on his hand; perhaps meditating on
the same subject. he had ceased drinking at a point below
irrationality, and had neither stirred nor spoken during two or three
hours. there was no sound through the house but the moaning wind, which
shook the windows every now and then, the faint crackling of the coals,
and the click of my snuffers as i removed at intervals the long wick of
the candle. hareton and joseph were probably fast asleep in bed. it was
very, very sad: and while i read i sighed, for it seemed as if all joy
had vanished from the world, never to be restored.

“the doleful silence was broken at length by the sound of the kitchen
latch: heathcliff had returned from his watch earlier than usual;
owing, i suppose, to the sudden storm. that entrance was fastened, and
we heard him coming round to get in by the other. i rose with an
irrepressible expression of what i felt on my lips, which induced my
companion, who had been staring towards the door, to turn and look at
me.

“‘i’ll keep him out five minutes,’ he exclaimed. ‘you won’t object?’

“‘no, you may keep him out the whole night for me,’ i answered. ‘do!
put the key in the lock, and draw the bolts.’

“earnshaw accomplished this ere his guest reached the front; he then
came and brought his chair to the other side of my table, leaning over
it, and searching in my eyes for a sympathy with the burning hate that
gleamed from his: as he both looked and felt like an assassin, he
couldn’t exactly find that; but he discovered enough to encourage him
to speak.

“‘you, and i,’ he said, ‘have each a great debt to settle with the man
out yonder! if we were neither of us cowards, we might combine to
discharge it. are you as soft as your brother? are you willing to
endure to the last, and not once attempt a repayment?’

“‘i’m weary of enduring now,’ i replied; ‘and i’d be glad of a
retaliation that wouldn’t recoil on myself; but treachery and violence
are spears pointed at both ends; they wound those who resort to them
worse than their enemies.’

“‘treachery and violence are a just return for treachery and violence!’
cried hindley. ‘mrs. heathcliff, i’ll ask you to do nothing; but sit
still and be dumb. tell me now, can you? i’m sure you would have as
much pleasure as i in witnessing the conclusion of the fiend’s
existence; he’ll be _your_ death unless you overreach him; and he’ll be
_my_ ruin. damn the hellish villain! he knocks at the door as if he
were master here already! promise to hold your tongue, and before that
clock strikes—it wants three minutes of one—you’re a free woman!’

“he took the implements which i described to you in my letter from his
breast, and would have turned down the candle. i snatched it away,
however, and seized his arm.

“‘i’ll not hold my tongue!’ i said; ‘you mustn’t touch him. let the
door remain shut, and be quiet!’

“‘no! i’ve formed my resolution, and by god i’ll execute it!’ cried the
desperate being. ‘i’ll do you a kindness in spite of yourself, and
hareton justice! and you needn’t trouble your head to screen me;
catherine is gone. nobody alive would regret me, or be ashamed, though
i cut my throat this minute—and it’s time to make an end!’

“i might as well have struggled with a bear, or reasoned with a
lunatic. the only resource left me was to run to a lattice and warn his
intended victim of the fate which awaited him.

“‘you’d better seek shelter somewhere else to-night!’ i exclaimed, in
rather a triumphant tone. ‘mr. earnshaw has a mind to shoot you, if you
persist in endeavouring to enter.’

“‘you’d better open the door, you—’ he answered, addressing me by some
elegant term that i don’t care to repeat.

“‘i shall not meddle in the matter,’ i retorted again. ‘come in and get
shot, if you please. i’ve done my duty.’

“with that i shut the window and returned to my place by the fire;
having too small a stock of hypocrisy at my command to pretend any
anxiety for the danger that menaced him. earnshaw swore passionately at
me: affirming that i loved the villain yet; and calling me all sorts of
names for the base spirit i evinced. and i, in my secret heart (and
conscience never reproached me), thought what a blessing it would be
for _him_ should heathcliff put him out of misery; and what a blessing
for _me_ should he send heathcliff to his right abode! as i sat nursing
these reflections, the casement behind me was banged on to the floor by
a blow from the latter individual, and his black countenance looked
blightingly through. the stanchions stood too close to suffer his
shoulders to follow, and i smiled, exulting in my fancied security. his
hair and clothes were whitened with snow, and his sharp cannibal teeth,
revealed by cold and wrath, gleamed through the dark.

“‘isabella, let me in, or i’ll make you repent!’ he ‘girned,’ as joseph
calls it.

“‘i cannot commit murder,’ i replied. ‘mr. hindley stands sentinel with
a knife and loaded pistol.’

“‘let me in by the kitchen door,’ he said.

“‘hindley will be there before me,’ i answered: ‘and that’s a poor love
of yours that cannot bear a shower of snow! we were left at peace in
our beds as long as the summer moon shone, but the moment a blast of
winter returns, you must run for shelter! heathcliff, if i were you,
i’d go stretch myself over her grave and die like a faithful dog. the
world is surely not worth living in now, is it? you had distinctly
impressed on me the idea that catherine was the whole joy of your life:
i can’t imagine how you think of surviving her loss.’

“‘he’s there, is he?’ exclaimed my companion, rushing to the gap. ‘if i
can get my arm out i can hit him!’

“i’m afraid, ellen, you’ll set me down as really wicked; but you don’t
know all, so don’t judge. i wouldn’t have aided or abetted an attempt
on even _his_ life for anything. wish that he were dead, i must; and
therefore i was fearfully disappointed, and unnerved by terror for the
consequences of my taunting speech, when he flung himself on earnshaw’s
weapon and wrenched it from his grasp.

“the charge exploded, and the knife, in springing back, closed into its
owner’s wrist. heathcliff pulled it away by main force, slitting up the
flesh as it passed on, and thrust it dripping into his pocket. he then
took a stone, struck down the division between two windows, and sprang
in. his adversary had fallen senseless with excessive pain and the flow
of blood, that gushed from an artery or a large vein. the ruffian
kicked and trampled on him, and dashed his head repeatedly against the
flags, holding me with one hand, meantime, to prevent me summoning
joseph. he exerted preterhuman self-denial in abstaining from finishing
him completely; but getting out of breath, he finally desisted, and
dragged the apparently inanimate body on to the settle. there he tore
off the sleeve of earnshaw’s coat, and bound up the wound with brutal
roughness; spitting and cursing during the operation as energetically
as he had kicked before. being at liberty, i lost no time in seeking
the old servant; who, having gathered by degrees the purport of my
hasty tale, hurried below, gasping, as he descended the steps two at
once.

“‘what is ther to do, now? what is ther to do, now?’

“‘there’s this to do,’ thundered heathcliff, ‘that your master’s mad;
and should he last another month, i’ll have him to an asylum. and how
the devil did you come to fasten me out, you toothless hound? don’t
stand muttering and mumbling there. come, i’m not going to nurse him.
wash that stuff away; and mind the sparks of your candle—it is more
than half brandy!’

“‘and so ye’ve been murthering on him?’ exclaimed joseph, lifting his
hands and eyes in horror. ‘if iver i seed a seeght loike this! may the
lord—’

“heathcliff gave him a push on to his knees in the middle of the blood,
and flung a towel to him; but instead of proceeding to dry it up, he
joined his hands and began a prayer, which excited my laughter from its
odd phraseology. i was in the condition of mind to be shocked at
nothing: in fact, i was as reckless as some malefactors show themselves
at the foot of the gallows.

“‘oh, i forgot you,’ said the tyrant. ‘you shall do that. down with
you. and you conspire with him against me, do you, viper? there, that
is work fit for you!’

“he shook me till my teeth rattled, and pitched me beside joseph, who
steadily concluded his supplications, and then rose, vowing he would
set off for the grange directly. mr. linton was a magistrate, and
though he had fifty wives dead, he should inquire into this. he was so
obstinate in his resolution, that heathcliff deemed it expedient to
compel from my lips a recapitulation of what had taken place; standing
over me, heaving with malevolence, as i reluctantly delivered the
account in answer to his questions. it required a great deal of labour
to satisfy the old man that heathcliff was not the aggressor;
especially with my hardly-wrung replies. however, mr. earnshaw soon
convinced him that he was alive still; joseph hastened to administer a
dose of spirits, and by their succour his master presently regained
motion and consciousness. heathcliff, aware that his opponent was
ignorant of the treatment received while insensible, called him
deliriously intoxicated; and said he should not notice his atrocious
conduct further, but advised him to get to bed. to my joy, he left us,
after giving this judicious counsel, and hindley stretched himself on
the hearthstone. i departed to my own room, marvelling that i had
escaped so easily.

“this morning, when i came down, about half an hour before noon, mr.
earnshaw was sitting by the fire, deadly sick; his evil genius, almost
as gaunt and ghastly, leant against the chimney. neither appeared
inclined to dine, and, having waited till all was cold on the table, i
commenced alone. nothing hindered me from eating heartily, and i
experienced a certain sense of satisfaction and superiority, as, at
intervals, i cast a look towards my silent companions, and felt the
comfort of a quiet conscience within me. after i had done, i ventured
on the unusual liberty of drawing near the fire, going round earnshaw’s
seat, and kneeling in the corner beside him.

“heathcliff did not glance my way, and i gazed up, and contemplated his
features almost as confidently as if they had been turned to stone. his
forehead, that i once thought so manly, and that i now think so
diabolical, was shaded with a heavy cloud; his basilisk eyes were
nearly quenched by sleeplessness, and weeping, perhaps, for the lashes
were wet then: his lips devoid of their ferocious sneer, and sealed in
an expression of unspeakable sadness. had it been another, i would have
covered my face in the presence of such grief. in _his_ case, i was
gratified; and, ignoble as it seems to insult a fallen enemy, i
couldn’t miss this chance of sticking in a dart: his weakness was the
only time when i could taste the delight of paying wrong for wrong.”

“fie, fie, miss!” i interrupted. “one might suppose you had never
opened a bible in your life. if god afflict your enemies, surely that
ought to suffice you. it is both mean and presumptuous to add your
torture to his!”

“in general i’ll allow that it would be, ellen,” she continued; “but
what misery laid on heathcliff could content me, unless i have a hand
in it? i’d rather he suffered _less_, if i might cause his sufferings
and he might _know_ that i was the cause. oh, i owe him so much. on
only one condition can i hope to forgive him. it is, if i may take an
eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth; for every wrench of agony return a
wrench: reduce him to my level. as he was the first to injure, make him
the first to implore pardon; and then—why then, ellen, i might show you
some generosity. but it is utterly impossible i can ever be revenged,
and therefore i cannot forgive him. hindley wanted some water, and i
handed him a glass, and asked him how he was.

“‘not as ill as i wish,’ he replied. ‘but leaving out my arm, every
inch of me is as sore as if i had been fighting with a legion of imps!’

“‘yes, no wonder,’ was my next remark. ‘catherine used to boast that
she stood between you and bodily harm: she meant that certain persons
would not hurt you for fear of offending her. it’s well people don’t
_really_ rise from their grave, or, last night, she might have
witnessed a repulsive scene! are not you bruised, and cut over your
chest and shoulders?’

“‘i can’t say,’ he answered; ‘but what do you mean? did he dare to
strike me when i was down?’

“‘he trampled on and kicked you, and dashed you on the ground,’ i
whispered. ‘and his mouth watered to tear you with his teeth; because
he’s only half man: not so much, and the rest fiend.’

“mr. earnshaw looked up, like me, to the countenance of our mutual foe;
who, absorbed in his anguish, seemed insensible to anything around him:
the longer he stood, the plainer his reflections revealed their
blackness through his features.

“‘oh, if god would but give me strength to strangle him in my last
agony, i’d go to hell with joy,’ groaned the impatient man, writhing to
rise, and sinking back in despair, convinced of his inadequacy for the
struggle.

“‘nay, it’s enough that he has murdered one of you,’ i observed aloud.
‘at the grange, every one knows your sister would have been living now
had it not been for mr. heathcliff. after all, it is preferable to be
hated than loved by him. when i recollect how happy we were—how happy
catherine was before he came—i’m fit to curse the day.’

“most likely, heathcliff noticed more the truth of what was said, than
the spirit of the person who said it. his attention was roused, i saw,
for his eyes rained down tears among the ashes, and he drew his breath
in suffocating sighs. i stared full at him, and laughed scornfully. the
clouded windows of hell flashed a moment towards me; the fiend which
usually looked out, however, was so dimmed and drowned that i did not
fear to hazard another sound of derision.

“‘get up, and begone out of my sight,’ said the mourner.

“i guessed he uttered those words, at least, though his voice was
hardly intelligible.

“‘i beg your pardon,’ i replied. ‘but i loved catherine too; and her
brother requires attendance, which, for her sake, i shall supply. now
that she’s dead, i see her in hindley: hindley has exactly her eyes, if
you had not tried to gouge them out, and made them black and red; and
her—’

“‘get up, wretched idiot, before i stamp you to death!’ he cried,
making a movement that caused me to make one also.

“‘but then,’ i continued, holding myself ready to flee, ‘if poor
catherine had trusted you, and assumed the ridiculous, contemptible,
degrading title of mrs. heathcliff, she would soon have presented a
similar picture! _she_ wouldn’t have borne your abominable behaviour
quietly: her detestation and disgust must have found voice.’

“the back of the settle and earnshaw’s person interposed between me and
him; so instead of endeavouring to reach me, he snatched a dinner-knife
from the table and flung it at my head. it struck beneath my ear, and
stopped the sentence i was uttering; but, pulling it out, i sprang to
the door and delivered another; which i hope went a little deeper than
his missile. the last glimpse i caught of him was a furious rush on his
part, checked by the embrace of his host; and both fell locked together
on the hearth. in my flight through the kitchen i bid joseph speed to
his master; i knocked over hareton, who was hanging a litter of puppies
from a chair-back in the doorway; and, blessed as a soul escaped from
purgatory, i bounded, leaped, and flew down the steep road; then,
quitting its windings, shot direct across the moor, rolling over banks,
and wading through marshes: precipitating myself, in fact, towards the
beacon-light of the grange. and far rather would i be condemned to a
perpetual dwelling in the infernal regions than, even for one night,
abide beneath the roof of wuthering heights again.”

isabella ceased speaking, and took a drink of tea; then she rose, and
bidding me put on her bonnet, and a great shawl i had brought, and
turning a deaf ear to my entreaties for her to remain another hour, she
stepped on to a chair, kissed edgar’s and catherine’s portraits,
bestowed a similar salute on me, and descended to the carriage,
accompanied by fanny, who yelped wild with joy at recovering her
mistress. she was driven away, never to revisit this neighbourhood: but
a regular correspondence was established between her and my master when
things were more settled. i believe her new abode was in the south,
near london; there she had a son born a few months subsequent to her
escape. he was christened linton, and, from the first, she reported him
to be an ailing, peevish creature.

mr. heathcliff, meeting me one day in the village, inquired where she
lived. i refused to tell. he remarked that it was not of any moment,
only she must beware of coming to her brother: she should not be with
him, if he had to keep her himself. though i would give no information,
he discovered, through some of the other servants, both her place of
residence and the existence of the child. still, he didn’t molest her:
for which forbearance she might thank his aversion, i suppose. he often
asked about the infant, when he saw me; and on hearing its name, smiled
grimly, and observed: “they wish me to hate it too, do they?”

“i don’t think they wish you to know anything about it,” i answered.

“but i’ll have it,” he said, “when i want it. they may reckon on that!”

fortunately its mother died before the time arrived; some thirteen
years after the decease of catherine, when linton was twelve, or a
little more.

on the day succeeding isabella’s unexpected visit i had no opportunity
of speaking to my master: he shunned conversation, and was fit for
discussing nothing. when i could get him to listen, i saw it pleased
him that his sister had left her husband; whom he abhorred with an
intensity which the mildness of his nature would scarcely seem to
allow. so deep and sensitive was his aversion, that he refrained from
going anywhere where he was likely to see or hear of heathcliff. grief,
and that together, transformed him into a complete hermit: he threw up
his office of magistrate, ceased even to attend church, avoided the
village on all occasions, and spent a life of entire seclusion within
the limits of his park and grounds; only varied by solitary rambles on
the moors, and visits to the grave of his wife, mostly at evening, or
early morning before other wanderers were abroad. but he was too good
to be thoroughly unhappy long. _he_ didn’t pray for catherine’s soul to
haunt him. time brought resignation, and a melancholy sweeter than
common joy. he recalled her memory with ardent, tender love, and
hopeful aspiring to the better world; where he doubted not she was
gone.

and he had earthly consolation and affections also. for a few days, i
said, he seemed regardless of the puny successor to the departed: that
coldness melted as fast as snow in april, and ere the tiny thing could
stammer a word or totter a step it wielded a despot’s sceptre in his
heart. it was named catherine; but he never called it the name in full,
as he had never called the first catherine short: probably because
heathcliff had a habit of doing so. the little one was always cathy: it
formed to him a distinction from the mother, and yet a connection with
her; and his attachment sprang from its relation to her, far more than
from its being his own.

i used to draw a comparison between him and hindley earnshaw, and
perplex myself to explain satisfactorily why their conduct was so
opposite in similar circumstances. they had both been fond husbands,
and were both attached to their children; and i could not see how they
shouldn’t both have taken the same road, for good or evil. but, i
thought in my mind, hindley, with apparently the stronger head, has
shown himself sadly the worse and the weaker man. when his ship struck,
the captain abandoned his post; and the crew, instead of trying to save
her, rushed into riot and confusion, leaving no hope for their luckless
vessel. linton, on the contrary, displayed the true courage of a loyal
and faithful soul: he trusted god; and god comforted him. one hoped,
and the other despaired: they chose their own lots, and were
righteously doomed to endure them. but you’ll not want to hear my
moralising, mr. lockwood; you’ll judge, as well as i can, all these
things: at least, you’ll think you will, and that’s the same. the end
of earnshaw was what might have been expected; it followed fast on his
sister’s: there were scarcely six months between them. we, at the
grange, never got a very succinct account of his state preceding it;
all that i did learn was on occasion of going to aid in the
preparations for the funeral. mr. kenneth came to announce the event to
my master.

“well, nelly,” said he, riding into the yard one morning, too early not
to alarm me with an instant presentiment of bad news, “it’s yours and
my turn to go into mourning at present. who’s given us the slip now, do
you think?”

“who?” i asked in a flurry.

“why, guess!” he returned, dismounting, and slinging his bridle on a
hook by the door. “and nip up the corner of your apron: i’m certain
you’ll need it.”

“not mr. heathcliff, surely?” i exclaimed.

“what! would you have tears for him?” said the doctor. “no,
heathcliff’s a tough young fellow: he looks blooming to-day. i’ve just
seen him. he’s rapidly regaining flesh since he lost his better half.”

“who is it, then, mr. kenneth?” i repeated impatiently.

“hindley earnshaw! your old friend hindley,” he replied, “and my wicked
gossip: though he’s been too wild for me this long while. there! i said
we should draw water. but cheer up! he died true to his character:
drunk as a lord. poor lad! i’m sorry, too. one can’t help missing an
old companion: though he had the worst tricks with him that ever man
imagined, and has done me many a rascally turn. he’s barely
twenty-seven, it seems; that’s your own age: who would have thought you
were born in one year?”

i confess this blow was greater to me than the shock of mrs. linton’s
death: ancient associations lingered round my heart; i sat down in the
porch and wept as for a blood relation, desiring mr. kenneth to get
another servant to introduce him to the master. i could not hinder
myself from pondering on the question—“had he had fair play?” whatever
i did, that idea would bother me: it was so tiresomely pertinacious
that i resolved on requesting leave to go to wuthering heights, and
assist in the last duties to the dead. mr. linton was extremely
reluctant to consent, but i pleaded eloquently for the friendless
condition in which he lay; and i said my old master and foster-brother
had a claim on my services as strong as his own. besides, i reminded
him that the child hareton was his wife’s nephew, and, in the absence
of nearer kin, he ought to act as its guardian; and he ought to and
must inquire how the property was left, and look over the concerns of
his brother-in-law. he was unfit for attending to such matters then,
but he bid me speak to his lawyer; and at length permitted me to go.
his lawyer had been earnshaw’s also: i called at the village, and asked
him to accompany me. he shook his head, and advised that heathcliff
should be let alone; affirming, if the truth were known, hareton would
be found little else than a beggar.

“his father died in debt,” he said; “the whole property is mortgaged,
and the sole chance for the natural heir is to allow him an opportunity
of creating some interest in the creditor’s heart, that he may be
inclined to deal leniently towards him.”

when i reached the heights, i explained that i had come to see
everything carried on decently; and joseph, who appeared in sufficient
distress, expressed satisfaction at my presence. mr. heathcliff said he
did not perceive that i was wanted; but i might stay and order the
arrangements for the funeral, if i chose.

“correctly,” he remarked, “that fool’s body should be buried at the
cross-roads, without ceremony of any kind. i happened to leave him ten
minutes yesterday afternoon, and in that interval he fastened the two
doors of the house against me, and he has spent the night in drinking
himself to death deliberately! we broke in this morning, for we heard
him snorting like a horse; and there he was, laid over the settle:
flaying and scalping would not have wakened him. i sent for kenneth,
and he came; but not till the beast had changed into carrion: he was
both dead and cold, and stark; and so you’ll allow it was useless
making more stir about him!”

the old servant confirmed this statement, but muttered:

“i’d rayther he’d goan hisseln for t’ doctor! i sud ha’ taen tent o’ t’
maister better nor him—and he warn’t deead when i left, naught o’ t’
soart!”

i insisted on the funeral being respectable. mr. heathcliff said i
might have my own way there too: only, he desired me to remember that
the money for the whole affair came out of his pocket. he maintained a
hard, careless deportment, indicative of neither joy nor sorrow: if
anything, it expressed a flinty gratification at a piece of difficult
work successfully executed. i observed once, indeed, something like
exultation in his aspect: it was just when the people were bearing the
coffin from the house. he had the hypocrisy to represent a mourner: and
previous to following with hareton, he lifted the unfortunate child on
to the table and muttered, with peculiar gusto, “now, my bonny lad, you
are _mine_! and we’ll see if one tree won’t grow as crooked as another,
with the same wind to twist it!” the unsuspecting thing was pleased at
this speech: he played with heathcliff’s whiskers, and stroked his
cheek; but i divined its meaning, and observed tartly, “that boy must
go back with me to thrushcross grange, sir. there is nothing in the
world less yours than he is!”

“does linton say so?” he demanded.

“of course—he has ordered me to take him,” i replied.

“well,” said the scoundrel, “we’ll not argue the subject now: but i
have a fancy to try my hand at rearing a young one; so intimate to your
master that i must supply the place of this with my own, if he attempt
to remove it. i don’t engage to let hareton go undisputed; but i’ll be
pretty sure to make the other come! remember to tell him.”

this hint was enough to bind our hands. i repeated its substance on my
return; and edgar linton, little interested at the commencement, spoke
no more of interfering. i’m not aware that he could have done it to any
purpose, had he been ever so willing.

the guest was now the master of wuthering heights: he held firm
possession, and proved to the attorney—who, in his turn, proved it to
mr. linton—that earnshaw had mortgaged every yard of land he owned for
cash to supply his mania for gaming; and he, heathcliff, was the
mortgagee. in that manner hareton, who should now be the first
gentleman in the neighbourhood, was reduced to a state of complete
dependence on his father’s inveterate enemy; and lives in his own house
as a servant, deprived of the advantage of wages: quite unable to right
himself, because of his friendlessness, and his ignorance that he has
been wronged.




chapter xviii


the twelve years, continued mrs. dean, following that dismal period
were the happiest of my life: my greatest troubles in their passage
rose from our little lady’s trifling illnesses, which she had to
experience in common with all children, rich and poor. for the rest,
after the first six months, she grew like a larch, and could walk and
talk too, in her own way, before the heath blossomed a second time over
mrs. linton’s dust. she was the most winning thing that ever brought
sunshine into a desolate house: a real beauty in face, with the
earnshaws’ handsome dark eyes, but the lintons’ fair skin and small
features, and yellow curling hair. her spirit was high, though not
rough, and qualified by a heart sensitive and lively to excess in its
affections. that capacity for intense attachments reminded me of her
mother: still she did not resemble her: for she could be soft and mild
as a dove, and she had a gentle voice and pensive expression: her anger
was never furious; her love never fierce: it was deep and tender.
however, it must be acknowledged, she had faults to foil her gifts. a
propensity to be saucy was one; and a perverse will, that indulged
children invariably acquire, whether they be good tempered or cross. if
a servant chanced to vex her, it was always—“i shall tell papa!” and if
he reproved her, even by a look, you would have thought it a
heart-breaking business: i don’t believe he ever did speak a harsh word
to her. he took her education entirely on himself, and made it an
amusement. fortunately, curiosity and a quick intellect made her an apt
scholar: she learned rapidly and eagerly, and did honour to his
teaching.

till she reached the age of thirteen she had not once been beyond the
range of the park by herself. mr. linton would take her with him a mile
or so outside, on rare occasions; but he trusted her to no one else.
gimmerton was an unsubstantial name in her ears; the chapel, the only
building she had approached or entered, except her own home. wuthering
heights and mr. heathcliff did not exist for her: she was a perfect
recluse; and, apparently, perfectly contented. sometimes, indeed, while
surveying the country from her nursery window, she would observe—

“ellen, how long will it be before i can walk to the top of those
hills? i wonder what lies on the other side—is it the sea?”

“no, miss cathy,” i would answer; “it is hills again, just like these.”

“and what are those golden rocks like when you stand under them?” she
once asked.

the abrupt descent of penistone crags particularly attracted her
notice; especially when the setting sun shone on it and the topmost
heights, and the whole extent of landscape besides lay in shadow. i
explained that they were bare masses of stone, with hardly enough earth
in their clefts to nourish a stunted tree.

“and why are they bright so long after it is evening here?” she
pursued.

“because they are a great deal higher up than we are,” replied i; “you
could not climb them, they are too high and steep. in winter the frost
is always there before it comes to us; and deep into summer i have
found snow under that black hollow on the north-east side!”

“oh, you have been on them!” she cried gleefully. “then i can go, too,
when i am a woman. has papa been, ellen?”

“papa would tell you, miss,” i answered, hastily, “that they are not
worth the trouble of visiting. the moors, where you ramble with him,
are much nicer; and thrushcross park is the finest place in the world.”

“but i know the park, and i don’t know those,” she murmured to herself.
“and i should delight to look round me from the brow of that tallest
point: my little pony minny shall take me some time.”

one of the maids mentioning the fairy cave, quite turned her head with
a desire to fulfil this project: she teased mr. linton about it; and he
promised she should have the journey when she got older. but miss
catherine measured her age by months, and, “now, am i old enough to go
to penistone crags?” was the constant question in her mouth. the road
thither wound close by wuthering heights. edgar had not the heart to
pass it; so she received as constantly the answer, “not yet, love: not
yet.”

i said mrs. heathcliff lived above a dozen years after quitting her
husband. her family were of a delicate constitution: she and edgar both
lacked the ruddy health that you will generally meet in these parts.
what her last illness was, i am not certain: i conjecture, they died of
the same thing, a kind of fever, slow at its commencement, but
incurable, and rapidly consuming life towards the close. she wrote to
inform her brother of the probable conclusion of a four-months’
indisposition under which she had suffered, and entreated him to come
to her, if possible; for she had much to settle, and she wished to bid
him adieu, and deliver linton safely into his hands. her hope was that
linton might be left with him, as he had been with her: his father, she
would fain convince herself, had no desire to assume the burden of his
maintenance or education. my master hesitated not a moment in complying
with her request: reluctant as he was to leave home at ordinary calls,
he flew to answer this; commending catherine to my peculiar vigilance,
in his absence, with reiterated orders that she must not wander out of
the park, even under my escort: he did not calculate on her going
unaccompanied.

he was away three weeks. the first day or two my charge sat in a corner
of the library, too sad for either reading or playing: in that quiet
state she caused me little trouble; but it was succeeded by an interval
of impatient, fretful weariness; and being too busy, and too old then,
to run up and down amusing her, i hit on a method by which she might
entertain herself. i used to send her on her travels round the
grounds—now on foot, and now on a pony; indulging her with a patient
audience of all her real and imaginary adventures when she returned.

the summer shone in full prime; and she took such a taste for this
solitary rambling that she often contrived to remain out from breakfast
till tea; and then the evenings were spent in recounting her fanciful
tales. i did not fear her breaking bounds; because the gates were
generally locked, and i thought she would scarcely venture forth alone,
if they had stood wide open. unluckily, my confidence proved misplaced.
catherine came to me, one morning, at eight o’clock, and said she was
that day an arabian merchant, going to cross the desert with his
caravan; and i must give her plenty of provision for herself and
beasts: a horse, and three camels, personated by a large hound and a
couple of pointers. i got together good store of dainties, and slung
them in a basket on one side of the saddle; and she sprang up as gay as
a fairy, sheltered by her wide-brimmed hat and gauze veil from the july
sun, and trotted off with a merry laugh, mocking my cautious counsel to
avoid galloping, and come back early. the naughty thing never made her
appearance at tea. one traveller, the hound, being an old dog and fond
of its ease, returned; but neither cathy, nor the pony, nor the two
pointers were visible in any direction: i despatched emissaries down
this path, and that path, and at last went wandering in search of her
myself. there was a labourer working at a fence round a plantation, on
the borders of the grounds. i inquired of him if he had seen our young
lady.

“i saw her at morn,” he replied: “she would have me to cut her a hazel
switch, and then she leapt her galloway over the hedge yonder, where it
is lowest, and galloped out of sight.”

you may guess how i felt at hearing this news. it struck me directly
she must have started for penistone crags. “what will become of her?” i
ejaculated, pushing through a gap which the man was repairing, and
making straight to the high-road. i walked as if for a wager, mile
after mile, till a turn brought me in view of the heights; but no
catherine could i detect, far or near. the crags lie about a mile and a
half beyond mr. heathcliff’s place, and that is four from the grange,
so i began to fear night would fall ere i could reach them. “and what
if she should have slipped in clambering among them,” i reflected, “and
been killed, or broken some of her bones?” my suspense was truly
painful; and, at first, it gave me delightful relief to observe, in
hurrying by the farmhouse, charlie, the fiercest of the pointers, lying
under a window, with swelled head and bleeding ear. i opened the wicket
and ran to the door, knocking vehemently for admittance. a woman whom i
knew, and who formerly lived at gimmerton, answered: she had been
servant there since the death of mr. earnshaw.

“ah,” said she, “you are come a-seeking your little mistress! don’t be
frightened. she’s here safe: but i’m glad it isn’t the master.”

“he is not at home then, is he?” i panted, quite breathless with quick
walking and alarm.

“no, no,” she replied: “both he and joseph are off, and i think they
won’t return this hour or more. step in and rest you a bit.”

i entered, and beheld my stray lamb seated on the hearth, rocking
herself in a little chair that had been her mother’s when a child. her
hat was hung against the wall, and she seemed perfectly at home,
laughing and chattering, in the best spirits imaginable, to hareton—now
a great, strong lad of eighteen—who stared at her with considerable
curiosity and astonishment: comprehending precious little of the fluent
succession of remarks and questions which her tongue never ceased
pouring forth.

“very well, miss!” i exclaimed, concealing my joy under an angry
countenance. “this is your last ride, till papa comes back. i’ll not
trust you over the threshold again, you naughty, naughty girl!”

“aha, ellen!” she cried, gaily, jumping up and running to my side. “i
shall have a pretty story to tell to-night; and so you’ve found me out.
have you ever been here in your life before?”

“put that hat on, and home at once,” said i. “i’m dreadfully grieved at
you, miss cathy: you’ve done extremely wrong! it’s no use pouting and
crying: that won’t repay the trouble i’ve had, scouring the country
after you. to think how mr. linton charged me to keep you in; and you
stealing off so! it shows you are a cunning little fox, and nobody will
put faith in you any more.”

“what have i done?” sobbed she, instantly checked. “papa charged me
nothing: he’ll not scold me, ellen—he’s never cross, like you!”

“come, come!” i repeated. “i’ll tie the riband. now, let us have no
petulance. oh, for shame! you thirteen years old, and such a baby!”

this exclamation was caused by her pushing the hat from her head, and
retreating to the chimney out of my reach.

“nay,” said the servant, “don’t be hard on the bonny lass, mrs. dean.
we made her stop: she’d fain have ridden forwards, afeard you should be
uneasy. hareton offered to go with her, and i thought he should: it’s a
wild road over the hills.”

hareton, during the discussion, stood with his hands in his pockets,
too awkward to speak; though he looked as if he did not relish my
intrusion.

“how long am i to wait?” i continued, disregarding the woman’s
interference. “it will be dark in ten minutes. where is the pony, miss
cathy? and where is phoenix? i shall leave you, unless you be quick; so
please yourself.”

“the pony is in the yard,” she replied, “and phoenix is shut in there.
he’s bitten—and so is charlie. i was going to tell you all about it;
but you are in a bad temper, and don’t deserve to hear.”

i picked up her hat, and approached to reinstate it; but perceiving
that the people of the house took her part, she commenced capering
round the room; and on my giving chase, ran like a mouse over and under
and behind the furniture, rendering it ridiculous for me to pursue.
hareton and the woman laughed, and she joined them, and waxed more
impertinent still; till i cried, in great irritation,—“well, miss
cathy, if you were aware whose house this is you’d be glad enough to
get out.”

“it’s _your_ father’s, isn’t it?” said she, turning to hareton.

“nay,” he replied, looking down, and blushing bashfully.

he could not stand a steady gaze from her eyes, though they were just
his own.

“whose then—your master’s?” she asked.

he coloured deeper, with a different feeling, muttered an oath, and
turned away.

“who is his master?” continued the tiresome girl, appealing to me. “he
talked about ‘our house,’ and ‘our folk.’ i thought he had been the
owner’s son. and he never said miss: he should have done, shouldn’t he,
if he’s a servant?”

hareton grew black as a thunder-cloud at this childish speech. i
silently shook my questioner, and at last succeeded in equipping her
for departure.

“now, get my horse,” she said, addressing her unknown kinsman as she
would one of the stable-boys at the grange. “and you may come with me.
i want to see where the goblin-hunter rises in the marsh, and to hear
about the _fairishes_, as you call them: but make haste! what’s the
matter? get my horse, i say.”

“i’ll see thee damned before i be _thy_ servant!” growled the lad.

“you’ll see me _what?_” asked catherine in surprise.

“damned—thou saucy witch!” he replied.

“there, miss cathy! you see you have got into pretty company,” i
interposed. “nice words to be used to a young lady! pray don’t begin to
dispute with him. come, let us seek for minny ourselves, and begone.”

“but, ellen,” cried she, staring fixed in astonishment, “how dare he
speak so to me? mustn’t he be made to do as i ask him? you wicked
creature, i shall tell papa what you said.—now, then!”

hareton did not appear to feel this threat; so the tears sprang into
her eyes with indignation. “you bring the pony,” she exclaimed, turning
to the woman, “and let my dog free this moment!”

“softly, miss,” answered the addressed. “you’ll lose nothing by being
civil. though mr. hareton, there, be not the master’s son, he’s your
cousin: and i was never hired to serve you.”

“_he_ my cousin!” cried cathy, with a scornful laugh.

“yes, indeed,” responded her reprover.

“oh, ellen! don’t let them say such things,” she pursued in great
trouble. “papa is gone to fetch my cousin from london: my cousin is a
gentleman’s son. that my—” she stopped, and wept outright; upset at the
bare notion of relationship with such a clown.

“hush, hush!” i whispered; “people can have many cousins and of all
sorts, miss cathy, without being any the worse for it; only they
needn’t keep their company, if they be disagreeable and bad.”

“he’s not—he’s not my cousin, ellen!” she went on, gathering fresh
grief from reflection, and flinging herself into my arms for refuge
from the idea.

i was much vexed at her and the servant for their mutual revelations;
having no doubt of linton’s approaching arrival, communicated by the
former, being reported to mr. heathcliff; and feeling as confident that
catherine’s first thought on her father’s return would be to seek an
explanation of the latter’s assertion concerning her rude-bred kindred.
hareton, recovering from his disgust at being taken for a servant,
seemed moved by her distress; and, having fetched the pony round to the
door, he took, to propitiate her, a fine crooked-legged terrier whelp
from the kennel, and putting it into her hand, bid her whist! for he
meant nought. pausing in her lamentations, she surveyed him with a
glance of awe and horror, then burst forth anew.

i could scarcely refrain from smiling at this antipathy to the poor
fellow; who was a well-made, athletic youth, good-looking in features,
and stout and healthy, but attired in garments befitting his daily
occupations of working on the farm and lounging among the moors after
rabbits and game. still, i thought i could detect in his physiognomy a
mind owning better qualities than his father ever possessed. good
things lost amid a wilderness of weeds, to be sure, whose rankness far
over-topped their neglected growth; yet, notwithstanding, evidence of a
wealthy soil, that might yield luxuriant crops under other and
favourable circumstances. mr. heathcliff, i believe, had not treated
him physically ill; thanks to his fearless nature, which offered no
temptation to that course of oppression: he had none of the timid
susceptibility that would have given zest to ill-treatment, in
heathcliff’s judgment. he appeared to have bent his malevolence on
making him a brute: he was never taught to read or write; never rebuked
for any bad habit which did not annoy his keeper; never led a single
step towards virtue, or guarded by a single precept against vice. and
from what i heard, joseph contributed much to his deterioration, by a
narrow-minded partiality which prompted him to flatter and pet him, as
a boy, because he was the head of the old family. and as he had been in
the habit of accusing catherine earnshaw and heathcliff, when children,
of putting the master past his patience, and compelling him to seek
solace in drink by what he termed their “offald ways,” so at present he
laid the whole burden of hareton’s faults on the shoulders of the
usurper of his property. if the lad swore, he wouldn’t correct him: nor
however culpably he behaved. it gave joseph satisfaction, apparently,
to watch him go the worst lengths: he allowed that the lad was ruined:
that his soul was abandoned to perdition; but then he reflected that
heathcliff must answer for it. hareton’s blood would be required at his
hands; and there lay immense consolation in that thought. joseph had
instilled into him a pride of name, and of his lineage; he would, had
he dared, have fostered hate between him and the present owner of the
heights: but his dread of that owner amounted to superstition; and he
confined his feelings regarding him to muttered innuendoes and private
comminations. i don’t pretend to be intimately acquainted with the mode
of living customary in those days at wuthering heights: i only speak
from hearsay; for i saw little. the villagers affirmed mr. heathcliff
was _near_, and a cruel hard landlord to his tenants; but the house,
inside, had regained its ancient aspect of comfort under female
management, and the scenes of riot common in hindley’s time were not
now enacted within its walls. the master was too gloomy to seek
companionship with any people, good or bad; and he is yet.

this, however, is not making progress with my story. miss cathy
rejected the peace-offering of the terrier, and demanded her own dogs,
charlie and phoenix. they came limping and hanging their heads; and we
set out for home, sadly out of sorts, every one of us. i could not
wring from my little lady how she had spent the day; except that, as i
supposed, the goal of her pilgrimage was penistone crags; and she
arrived without adventure to the gate of the farmhouse, when hareton
happened to issue forth, attended by some canine followers, who
attacked her train. they had a smart battle, before their owners could
separate them: that formed an introduction. catherine told hareton who
she was, and where she was going; and asked him to show her the way:
finally, beguiling him to accompany her. he opened the mysteries of the
fairy cave, and twenty other queer places. but, being in disgrace, i
was not favoured with a description of the interesting objects she saw.
i could gather, however, that her guide had been a favourite till she
hurt his feelings by addressing him as a servant; and heathcliff’s
housekeeper hurt hers by calling him her cousin. then the language he
had held to her rankled in her heart; she who was always “love,” and
“darling,” and “queen,” and “angel,” with everybody at the grange, to
be insulted so shockingly by a stranger! she did not comprehend it; and
hard work i had to obtain a promise that she would not lay the
grievance before her father. i explained how he objected to the whole
household at the heights, and how sorry he would be to find she had
been there; but i insisted most on the fact, that if she revealed my
negligence of his orders, he would perhaps be so angry that i should
have to leave; and cathy couldn’t bear that prospect: she pledged her
word, and kept it for my sake. after all, she was a sweet little girl.




chapter xix


a letter, edged with black, announced the day of my master’s return.
isabella was dead; and he wrote to bid me get mourning for his
daughter, and arrange a room, and other accommodations, for his
youthful nephew. catherine ran wild with joy at the idea of welcoming
her father back; and indulged most sanguine anticipations of the
innumerable excellencies of her “real” cousin. the evening of their
expected arrival came. since early morning she had been busy ordering
her own small affairs; and now attired in her new black frock—poor
thing! her aunt’s death impressed her with no definite sorrow—she
obliged me, by constant worrying, to walk with her down through the
grounds to meet them.

“linton is just six months younger than i am,” she chattered, as we
strolled leisurely over the swells and hollows of mossy turf, under
shadow of the trees. “how delightful it will be to have him for a
playfellow! aunt isabella sent papa a beautiful lock of his hair; it
was lighter than mine—more flaxen, and quite as fine. i have it
carefully preserved in a little glass box; and i’ve often thought what
a pleasure it would be to see its owner. oh! i am happy—and papa, dear,
dear papa! come, ellen, let us run! come, run.”

she ran, and returned and ran again, many times before my sober
footsteps reached the gate, and then she seated herself on the grassy
bank beside the path, and tried to wait patiently; but that was
impossible: she couldn’t be still a minute.

“how long they are!” she exclaimed. “ah, i see some dust on the
road—they are coming! no! when will they be here? may we not go a
little way—half a mile, ellen, only just half a mile? do say yes, to
that clump of birches at the turn!”

i refused staunchly. at length her suspense was ended: the travelling
carriage rolled in sight. miss cathy shrieked and stretched out her
arms as soon as she caught her father’s face looking from the window.
he descended, nearly as eager as herself; and a considerable interval
elapsed ere they had a thought to spare for any but themselves. while
they exchanged caresses i took a peep in to see after linton. he was
asleep in a corner, wrapped in a warm, fur-lined cloak, as if it had
been winter. a pale, delicate, effeminate boy, who might have been
taken for my master’s younger brother, so strong was the resemblance:
but there was a sickly peevishness in his aspect that edgar linton
never had. the latter saw me looking; and having shaken hands, advised
me to close the door, and leave him undisturbed; for the journey had
fatigued him. cathy would fain have taken one glance, but her father
told her to come, and they walked together up the park, while i
hastened before to prepare the servants.

“now, darling,” said mr. linton, addressing his daughter, as they
halted at the bottom of the front steps: “your cousin is not so strong
or so merry as you are, and he has lost his mother, remember, a very
short time since; therefore, don’t expect him to play and run about
with you directly. and don’t harass him much by talking: let him be
quiet this evening, at least, will you?”

“yes, yes, papa,” answered catherine: “but i do want to see him; and he
hasn’t once looked out.”

the carriage stopped; and the sleeper being roused, was lifted to the
ground by his uncle.

“this is your cousin cathy, linton,” he said, putting their little
hands together. “she’s fond of you already; and mind you don’t grieve
her by crying to-night. try to be cheerful now; the travelling is at an
end, and you have nothing to do but rest and amuse yourself as you
please.”

“let me go to bed, then,” answered the boy, shrinking from catherine’s
salute; and he put his fingers to his eyes to remove incipient tears.

“come, come, there’s a good child,” i whispered, leading him in.
“you’ll make her weep too—see how sorry she is for you!”

i do not know whether it was sorrow for him, but his cousin put on as
sad a countenance as himself, and returned to her father. all three
entered, and mounted to the library, where tea was laid ready. i
proceeded to remove linton’s cap and mantle, and placed him on a chair
by the table; but he was no sooner seated than he began to cry afresh.
my master inquired what was the matter.

“i can’t sit on a chair,” sobbed the boy.

“go to the sofa, then, and ellen shall bring you some tea,” answered
his uncle patiently.

he had been greatly tried, during the journey, i felt convinced, by his
fretful ailing charge. linton slowly trailed himself off, and lay down.
cathy carried a footstool and her cup to his side. at first she sat
silent; but that could not last: she had resolved to make a pet of her
little cousin, as she would have him to be; and she commenced stroking
his curls, and kissing his cheek, and offering him tea in her saucer,
like a baby. this pleased him, for he was not much better: he dried his
eyes, and lightened into a faint smile.

“oh, he’ll do very well,” said the master to me, after watching them a
minute. “very well, if we can keep him, ellen. the company of a child
of his own age will instil new spirit into him soon, and by wishing for
strength he’ll gain it.”

“ay, if we can keep him!” i mused to myself; and sore misgivings came
over me that there was slight hope of that. and then, i thought, how
ever will that weakling live at wuthering heights? between his father
and hareton, what playmates and instructors they’ll be. our doubts were
presently decided—even earlier than i expected. i had just taken the
children upstairs, after tea was finished, and seen linton asleep—he
would not suffer me to leave him till that was the case—i had come
down, and was standing by the table in the hall, lighting a bedroom
candle for mr. edgar, when a maid stepped out of the kitchen and
informed me that mr. heathcliff’s servant joseph was at the door, and
wished to speak with the master.

“i shall ask him what he wants first,” i said, in considerable
trepidation. “a very unlikely hour to be troubling people, and the
instant they have returned from a long journey. i don’t think the
master can see him.”

joseph had advanced through the kitchen as i uttered these words, and
now presented himself in the hall. he was donned in his sunday
garments, with his most sanctimonious and sourest face, and, holding
his hat in one hand, and his stick in the other, he proceeded to clean
his shoes on the mat.

“good-evening, joseph,” i said, coldly. “what business brings you here
to-night?”

“it’s maister linton i mun spake to,” he answered, waving me
disdainfully aside.

“mr. linton is going to bed; unless you have something particular to
say, i’m sure he won’t hear it now,” i continued. “you had better sit
down in there, and entrust your message to me.”

“which is his rahm?” pursued the fellow, surveying the range of closed
doors.

i perceived he was bent on refusing my mediation, so very reluctantly i
went up to the library, and announced the unseasonable visitor,
advising that he should be dismissed till next day. mr. linton had no
time to empower me to do so, for joseph mounted close at my heels, and,
pushing into the apartment, planted himself at the far side of the
table, with his two fists clapped on the head of his stick, and began
in an elevated tone, as if anticipating opposition—

“hathecliff has sent me for his lad, and i munn’t goa back ’bout him.”

edgar linton was silent a minute; an expression of exceeding sorrow
overcast his features: he would have pitied the child on his own
account; but, recalling isabella’s hopes and fears, and anxious wishes
for her son, and her commendations of him to his care, he grieved
bitterly at the prospect of yielding him up, and searched in his heart
how it might be avoided. no plan offered itself: the very exhibition of
any desire to keep him would have rendered the claimant more
peremptory: there was nothing left but to resign him. however, he was
not going to rouse him from his sleep.

“tell mr. heathcliff,” he answered calmly, “that his son shall come to
wuthering heights to-morrow. he is in bed, and too tired to go the
distance now. you may also tell him that the mother of linton desired
him to remain under my guardianship; and, at present, his health is
very precarious.”

“noa!” said joseph, giving a thud with his prop on the floor, and
assuming an authoritative air. “noa! that means naught. hathecliff maks
noa ’count o’ t’ mother, nor ye norther; but he’ll hev his lad; und i
mun tak’ him—soa now ye knaw!”

“you shall not to-night!” answered linton decisively. “walk down stairs
at once, and repeat to your master what i have said. ellen, show him
down. go—”

and, aiding the indignant elder with a lift by the arm, he rid the room
of him and closed the door.

“varrah weell!” shouted joseph, as he slowly drew off. “to-morn, he’s
come hisseln, and thrust _him_ out, if ye darr!”




chapter xx


to obviate the danger of this threat being fulfilled, mr. linton
commissioned me to take the boy home early, on catherine’s pony; and,
said he—“as we shall now have no influence over his destiny, good or
bad, you must say nothing of where he is gone to my daughter: she
cannot associate with him hereafter, and it is better for her to remain
in ignorance of his proximity; lest she should be restless, and anxious
to visit the heights. merely tell her his father sent for him suddenly,
and he has been obliged to leave us.”

linton was very reluctant to be roused from his bed at five o’clock,
and astonished to be informed that he must prepare for further
travelling; but i softened off the matter by stating that he was going
to spend some time with his father, mr. heathcliff, who wished to see
him so much, he did not like to defer the pleasure till he should
recover from his late journey.

“my father!” he cried, in strange perplexity. “mamma never told me i
had a father. where does he live? i’d rather stay with uncle.”

“he lives a little distance from the grange,” i replied; “just beyond
those hills: not so far, but you may walk over here when you get
hearty. and you should be glad to go home, and to see him. you must try
to love him, as you did your mother, and then he will love you.”

“but why have i not heard of him before?” asked linton. “why didn’t
mamma and he live together, as other people do?”

“he had business to keep him in the north,” i answered, “and your
mother’s health required her to reside in the south.”

“and why didn’t mamma speak to me about him?” persevered the child.
“she often talked of uncle, and i learnt to love him long ago. how am i
to love papa? i don’t know him.”

“oh, all children love their parents,” i said. “your mother, perhaps,
thought you would want to be with him if she mentioned him often to
you. let us make haste. an early ride on such a beautiful morning is
much preferable to an hour’s more sleep.”

“is _she_ to go with us,” he demanded, “the little girl i saw
yesterday?”

“not now,” replied i.

“is uncle?” he continued.

“no, i shall be your companion there,” i said.

linton sank back on his pillow and fell into a brown study.

“i won’t go without uncle,” he cried at length: “i can’t tell where you
mean to take me.”

i attempted to persuade him of the naughtiness of showing reluctance to
meet his father; still he obstinately resisted any progress towards
dressing, and i had to call for my master’s assistance in coaxing him
out of bed. the poor thing was finally got off, with several delusive
assurances that his absence should be short: that mr. edgar and cathy
would visit him, and other promises, equally ill-founded, which i
invented and reiterated at intervals throughout the way. the pure
heather-scented air, the bright sunshine, and the gentle canter of
minny, relieved his despondency after a while. he began to put
questions concerning his new home, and its inhabitants, with greater
interest and liveliness.

“is wuthering heights as pleasant a place as thrushcross grange?” he
inquired, turning to take a last glance into the valley, whence a light
mist mounted and formed a fleecy cloud on the skirts of the blue.

“it is not so buried in trees,” i replied, “and it is not quite so
large, but you can see the country beautifully all round; and the air
is healthier for you—fresher and drier. you will, perhaps, think the
building old and dark at first; though it is a respectable house: the
next best in the neighbourhood. and you will have such nice rambles on
the moors. hareton earnshaw—that is, miss cathy’s other cousin, and so
yours in a manner—will show you all the sweetest spots; and you can
bring a book in fine weather, and make a green hollow your study; and,
now and then, your uncle may join you in a walk: he does, frequently,
walk out on the hills.”

“and what is my father like?” he asked. “is he as young and handsome as
uncle?”

“he’s as young,” said i; “but he has black hair and eyes, and looks
sterner; and he is taller and bigger altogether. he’ll not seem to you
so gentle and kind at first, perhaps, because it is not his way: still,
mind you, be frank and cordial with him; and naturally he’ll be fonder
of you than any uncle, for you are his own.”

“black hair and eyes!” mused linton. “i can’t fancy him. then i am not
like him, am i?”

“not much,” i answered: not a morsel, i thought, surveying with regret
the white complexion and slim frame of my companion, and his large
languid eyes—his mother’s eyes, save that, unless a morbid touchiness
kindled them a moment, they had not a vestige of her sparkling spirit.

“how strange that he should never come to see mamma and me!” he
murmured. “has he ever seen me? if he has, i must have been a baby. i
remember not a single thing about him!”

“why, master linton,” said i, “three hundred miles is a great distance;
and ten years seem very different in length to a grown-up person
compared with what they do to you. it is probable mr. heathcliff
proposed going from summer to summer, but never found a convenient
opportunity; and now it is too late. don’t trouble him with questions
on the subject: it will disturb him, for no good.”

the boy was fully occupied with his own cogitations for the remainder
of the ride, till we halted before the farmhouse garden-gate. i watched
to catch his impressions in his countenance. he surveyed the carved
front and low-browed lattices, the straggling gooseberry-bushes and
crooked firs, with solemn intentness, and then shook his head: his
private feelings entirely disapproved of the exterior of his new abode.
but he had sense to postpone complaining: there might be compensation
within. before he dismounted, i went and opened the door. it was
half-past six; the family had just finished breakfast: the servant was
clearing and wiping down the table. joseph stood by his master’s chair
telling some tale concerning a lame horse; and hareton was preparing
for the hayfield.

“hallo, nelly!” said mr. heathcliff, when he saw me. “i feared i should
have to come down and fetch my property myself. you’ve brought it, have
you? let us see what we can make of it.”

he got up and strode to the door: hareton and joseph followed in gaping
curiosity. poor linton ran a frightened eye over the faces of the
three.

“sure-ly,” said joseph after a grave inspection, “he’s swopped wi’ ye,
maister, an’ yon’s his lass!”

heathcliff, having stared his son into an ague of confusion, uttered a
scornful laugh.

“god! what a beauty! what a lovely, charming thing!” he exclaimed.
“hav’n’t they reared it on snails and sour milk, nelly? oh, damn my
soul! but that’s worse than i expected—and the devil knows i was not
sanguine!”

i bid the trembling and bewildered child get down, and enter. he did
not thoroughly comprehend the meaning of his father’s speech, or
whether it were intended for him: indeed, he was not yet certain that
the grim, sneering stranger was his father. but he clung to me with
growing trepidation; and on mr. heathcliff’s taking a seat and bidding
him “come hither” he hid his face on my shoulder and wept.

“tut, tut!” said heathcliff, stretching out a hand and dragging him
roughly between his knees, and then holding up his head by the chin.
“none of that nonsense! we’re not going to hurt thee, linton—isn’t that
thy name? thou art thy mother’s child, entirely! where is _my_ share in
thee, puling chicken?”

he took off the boy’s cap and pushed back his thick flaxen curls, felt
his slender arms and his small fingers; during which examination linton
ceased crying, and lifted his great blue eyes to inspect the inspector.

“do you know me?” asked heathcliff, having satisfied himself that the
limbs were all equally frail and feeble.

“no,” said linton, with a gaze of vacant fear.

“you’ve heard of me, i daresay?”

“no,” he replied again.

“no! what a shame of your mother, never to waken your filial regard for
me! you are my son, then, i’ll tell you; and your mother was a wicked
slut to leave you in ignorance of the sort of father you possessed.
now, don’t wince, and colour up! though it _is_ something to see you
have not white blood. be a good lad; and i’ll do for you. nelly, if you
be tired you may sit down; if not, get home again. i guess you’ll
report what you hear and see to the cipher at the grange; and this
thing won’t be settled while you linger about it.”

“well,” replied i, “i hope you’ll be kind to the boy, mr. heathcliff,
or you’ll not keep him long; and he’s all you have akin in the wide
world, that you will ever know—remember.”

“i’ll be _very_ kind to him, you needn’t fear,” he said, laughing.
“only nobody else must be kind to him: i’m jealous of monopolising his
affection. and, to begin my kindness, joseph, bring the lad some
breakfast. hareton, you infernal calf, begone to your work. yes, nell,”
he added, when they had departed, “my son is prospective owner of your
place, and i should not wish him to die till i was certain of being his
successor. besides, he’s _mine_, and i want the triumph of seeing _my_
descendant fairly lord of their estates; my child hiring their children
to till their fathers’ lands for wages. that is the sole consideration
which can make me endure the whelp: i despise him for himself, and hate
him for the memories he revives! but that consideration is sufficient:
he’s as safe with me, and shall be tended as carefully as your master
tends his own. i have a room upstairs, furnished for him in handsome
style; i’ve engaged a tutor, also, to come three times a week, from
twenty miles’ distance, to teach him what he pleases to learn. i’ve
ordered hareton to obey him: and in fact i’ve arranged everything with
a view to preserve the superior and the gentleman in him, above his
associates. i do regret, however, that he so little deserves the
trouble: if i wished any blessing in the world, it was to find him a
worthy object of pride; and i’m bitterly disappointed with the
whey-faced, whining wretch!”

while he was speaking, joseph returned bearing a basin of
milk-porridge, and placed it before linton: who stirred round the
homely mess with a look of aversion, and affirmed he could not eat it.
i saw the old man-servant shared largely in his master’s scorn of the
child; though he was compelled to retain the sentiment in his heart,
because heathcliff plainly meant his underlings to hold him in honour.

“cannot ate it?” repeated he, peering in linton’s face, and subduing
his voice to a whisper, for fear of being overheard. “but maister
hareton nivir ate naught else, when he wer a little ’un; and what wer
gooid eneugh for him’s gooid eneugh for ye, i’s rayther think!”

“i _sha’n’t_ eat it!” answered linton, snappishly. “take it away.”

joseph snatched up the food indignantly, and brought it to us.

“is there aught ails th’ victuals?” he asked, thrusting the tray under
heathcliff’s nose.

“what should ail them?” he said.

“wah!” answered joseph, “yon dainty chap says he cannut ate ’em. but i
guess it’s raight! his mother wer just soa—we wer a’most too mucky to
sow t’ corn for makking her breead.”

“don’t mention his mother to me,” said the master, angrily. “get him
something that he can eat, that’s all. what is his usual food, nelly?”

i suggested boiled milk or tea; and the housekeeper received
instructions to prepare some. come, i reflected, his father’s
selfishness may contribute to his comfort. he perceives his delicate
constitution, and the necessity of treating him tolerably. i’ll console
mr. edgar by acquainting him with the turn heathcliff’s humour has
taken. having no excuse for lingering longer, i slipped out, while
linton was engaged in timidly rebuffing the advances of a friendly
sheep-dog. but he was too much on the alert to be cheated: as i closed
the door, i heard a cry, and a frantic repetition of the words—

“don’t leave me! i’ll not stay here! i’ll not stay here!”

then the latch was raised and fell: they did not suffer him to come
forth. i mounted minny, and urged her to a trot; and so my brief
guardianship ended.




chapter xxi


we had sad work with little cathy that day: she rose in high glee,
eager to join her cousin, and such passionate tears and lamentations
followed the news of his departure that edgar himself was obliged to
soothe her, by affirming he should come back soon: he added, however,
“if i can get him”; and there were no hopes of that. this promise
poorly pacified her; but time was more potent; and though still at
intervals she inquired of her father when linton would return, before
she did see him again his features had waxed so dim in her memory that
she did not recognise him.

when i chanced to encounter the housekeeper of wuthering heights, in
paying business visits to gimmerton, i used to ask how the young master
got on; for he lived almost as secluded as catherine herself, and was
never to be seen. i could gather from her that he continued in weak
health, and was a tiresome inmate. she said mr. heathcliff seemed to
dislike him ever longer and worse, though he took some trouble to
conceal it: he had an antipathy to the sound of his voice, and could
not do at all with his sitting in the same room with him many minutes
together. there seldom passed much talk between them: linton learnt his
lessons and spent his evenings in a small apartment they called the
parlour: or else lay in bed all day: for he was constantly getting
coughs, and colds, and aches, and pains of some sort.

“and i never knew such a faint-hearted creature,” added the woman; “nor
one so careful of hisseln. he _will_ go on, if i leave the window open
a bit late in the evening. oh! it’s killing, a breath of night air! and
he must have a fire in the middle of summer; and joseph’s bacca-pipe is
poison; and he must always have sweets and dainties, and always milk,
milk for ever—heeding naught how the rest of us are pinched in winter;
and there he’ll sit, wrapped in his furred cloak in his chair by the
fire, with some toast and water or other slop on the hob to sip at; and
if hareton, for pity, comes to amuse him—hareton is not bad-natured,
though he’s rough—they’re sure to part, one swearing and the other
crying. i believe the master would relish earnshaw’s thrashing him to a
mummy, if he were not his son; and i’m certain he would be fit to turn
him out of doors, if he knew half the nursing he gives hisseln. but
then he won’t go into danger of temptation: he never enters the
parlour, and should linton show those ways in the house where he is, he
sends him upstairs directly.”

i divined, from this account, that utter lack of sympathy had rendered
young heathcliff selfish and disagreeable, if he were not so
originally; and my interest in him, consequently, decayed: though still
i was moved with a sense of grief at his lot, and a wish that he had
been left with us. mr. edgar encouraged me to gain information: he
thought a great deal about him, i fancy, and would have run some risk
to see him; and he told me once to ask the housekeeper whether he ever
came into the village? she said he had only been twice, on horseback,
accompanying his father; and both times he pretended to be quite
knocked up for three or four days afterwards. that housekeeper left, if
i recollect rightly, two years after he came; and another, whom i did
not know, was her successor; she lives there still.

time wore on at the grange in its former pleasant way till miss cathy
reached sixteen. on the anniversary of her birth we never manifested
any signs of rejoicing, because it was also the anniversary of my late
mistress’s death. her father invariably spent that day alone in the
library; and walked, at dusk, as far as gimmerton kirkyard, where he
would frequently prolong his stay beyond midnight. therefore catherine
was thrown on her own resources for amusement. this twentieth of march
was a beautiful spring day, and when her father had retired, my young
lady came down dressed for going out, and said she asked to have a
ramble on the edge of the moor with me: mr. linton had given her leave,
if we went only a short distance and were back within the hour.

“so make haste, ellen!” she cried. “i know where i wish to go; where a
colony of moor-game are settled: i want to see whether they have made
their nests yet.”

“that must be a good distance up,” i answered; “they don’t breed on the
edge of the moor.”

“no, it’s not,” she said. “i’ve gone very near with papa.”

i put on my bonnet and sallied out, thinking nothing more of the
matter. she bounded before me, and returned to my side, and was off
again like a young greyhound; and, at first, i found plenty of
entertainment in listening to the larks singing far and near, and
enjoying the sweet, warm sunshine; and watching her, my pet and my
delight, with her golden ringlets flying loose behind, and her bright
cheek, as soft and pure in its bloom as a wild rose, and her eyes
radiant with cloudless pleasure. she was a happy creature, and an
angel, in those days. it’s a pity she could not be content.

“well,” said i, “where are your moor-game, miss cathy? we should be at
them: the grange park-fence is a great way off now.”

“oh, a little further—only a little further, ellen,” was her answer,
continually. “climb to that hillock, pass that bank, and by the time
you reach the other side i shall have raised the birds.”

but there were so many hillocks and banks to climb and pass, that, at
length, i began to be weary, and told her we must halt, and retrace our
steps. i shouted to her, as she had outstripped me a long way; she
either did not hear or did not regard, for she still sprang on, and i
was compelled to follow. finally, she dived into a hollow; and before i
came in sight of her again, she was two miles nearer wuthering heights
than her own home; and i beheld a couple of persons arrest her, one of
whom i felt convinced was mr. heathcliff himself.

cathy had been caught in the fact of plundering, or, at least, hunting
out the nests of the grouse. the heights were heathcliff’s land, and he
was reproving the poacher.

“i’ve neither taken any nor found any,” she said, as i toiled to them,
expanding her hands in corroboration of the statement. “i didn’t mean
to take them; but papa told me there were quantities up here, and i
wished to see the eggs.”

heathcliff glanced at me with an ill-meaning smile, expressing his
acquaintance with the party, and, consequently, his malevolence towards
it, and demanded who “papa” was?

“mr. linton of thrushcross grange,” she replied. “i thought you did not
know me, or you wouldn’t have spoken in that way.”

“you suppose papa is highly esteemed and respected, then?” he said,
sarcastically.

“and what are you?” inquired catherine, gazing curiously on the
speaker. “that man i’ve seen before. is he your son?”

she pointed to hareton, the other individual, who had gained nothing
but increased bulk and strength by the addition of two years to his
age: he seemed as awkward and rough as ever.

“miss cathy,” i interrupted, “it will be three hours instead of one
that we are out, presently. we really must go back.”

“no, that man is not my son,” answered heathcliff, pushing me aside.
“but i have one, and you have seen him before too; and, though your
nurse is in a hurry, i think both you and she would be the better for a
little rest. will you just turn this nab of heath, and walk into my
house? you’ll get home earlier for the ease; and you shall receive a
kind welcome.”

i whispered catherine that she mustn’t, on any account, accede to the
proposal: it was entirely out of the question.

“why?” she asked, aloud. “i’m tired of running, and the ground is dewy:
i can’t sit here. let us go, ellen. besides, he says i have seen his
son. he’s mistaken, i think; but i guess where he lives: at the
farmhouse i visited in coming from penistone crags. don’t you?”

“i do. come, nelly, hold your tongue—it will be a treat for her to look
in on us. hareton, get forwards with the lass. you shall walk with me,
nelly.”

“no, she’s not going to any such place,” i cried, struggling to release
my arm, which he had seized: but she was almost at the door-stones
already, scampering round the brow at full speed. her appointed
companion did not pretend to escort her: he shied off by the road-side,
and vanished.

“mr. heathcliff, it’s very wrong,” i continued: “you know you mean no
good. and there she’ll see linton, and all will be told as soon as ever
we return; and i shall have the blame.”

“i want her to see linton,” he answered; “he’s looking better these few
days; it’s not often he’s fit to be seen. and we’ll soon persuade her
to keep the visit secret: where is the harm of it?”

“the harm of it is, that her father would hate me if he found i
suffered her to enter your house; and i am convinced you have a bad
design in encouraging her to do so,” i replied.

“my design is as honest as possible. i’ll inform you of its whole
scope,” he said. “that the two cousins may fall in love, and get
married. i’m acting generously to your master: his young chit has no
expectations, and should she second my wishes she’ll be provided for at
once as joint successor with linton.”

“if linton died,” i answered, “and his life is quite uncertain,
catherine would be the heir.”

“no, she would not,” he said. “there is no clause in the will to secure
it so: his property would go to me; but, to prevent disputes, i desire
their union, and am resolved to bring it about.”

“and i’m resolved she shall never approach your house with me again,” i
returned, as we reached the gate, where miss cathy waited our coming.

heathcliff bade me be quiet; and, preceding us up the path, hastened to
open the door. my young lady gave him several looks, as if she could
not exactly make up her mind what to think of him; but now he smiled
when he met her eye, and softened his voice in addressing her; and i
was foolish enough to imagine the memory of her mother might disarm him
from desiring her injury. linton stood on the hearth. he had been out
walking in the fields, for his cap was on, and he was calling to joseph
to bring him dry shoes. he had grown tall of his age, still wanting
some months of sixteen. his features were pretty yet, and his eye and
complexion brighter than i remembered them, though with merely
temporary lustre borrowed from the salubrious air and genial sun.

“now, who is that?” asked mr. heathcliff, turning to cathy. “can you
tell?”

“your son?” she said, having doubtfully surveyed, first one and then
the other.

“yes, yes,” answered he: “but is this the only time you have beheld
him? think! ah! you have a short memory. linton, don’t you recall your
cousin, that you used to tease us so with wishing to see?”

“what, linton!” cried cathy, kindling into joyful surprise at the name.
“is that little linton? he’s taller than i am! are you linton?”

the youth stepped forward, and acknowledged himself: she kissed him
fervently, and they gazed with wonder at the change time had wrought in
the appearance of each. catherine had reached her full height; her
figure was both plump and slender, elastic as steel, and her whole
aspect sparkling with health and spirits. linton’s looks and movements
were very languid, and his form extremely slight; but there was a grace
in his manner that mitigated these defects, and rendered him not
unpleasing. after exchanging numerous marks of fondness with him, his
cousin went to mr. heathcliff, who lingered by the door, dividing his
attention between the objects inside and those that lay without:
pretending, that is, to observe the latter, and really noting the
former alone.

“and you are my uncle, then!” she cried, reaching up to salute him. “i
thought i liked you, though you were cross at first. why don’t you
visit at the grange with linton? to live all these years such close
neighbours, and never see us, is odd: what have you done so for?”

“i visited it once or twice too often before you were born,” he
answered. “there—damn it! if you have any kisses to spare, give them to
linton: they are thrown away on me.”

“naughty ellen!” exclaimed catherine, flying to attack me next with her
lavish caresses. “wicked ellen! to try to hinder me from entering. but
i’ll take this walk every morning in future: may i, uncle? and
sometimes bring papa. won’t you be glad to see us?”

“of course,” replied the uncle, with a hardly suppressed grimace,
resulting from his deep aversion to both the proposed visitors. “but
stay,” he continued, turning towards the young lady. “now i think of
it, i’d better tell you. mr. linton has a prejudice against me: we
quarrelled at one time of our lives, with unchristian ferocity; and, if
you mention coming here to him, he’ll put a veto on your visits
altogether. therefore, you must not mention it, unless you be careless
of seeing your cousin hereafter: you may come, if you will, but you
must not mention it.”

“why did you quarrel?” asked catherine, considerably crestfallen.

“he thought me too poor to wed his sister,” answered heathcliff, “and
was grieved that i got her: his pride was hurt, and he’ll never forgive
it.”

“that’s wrong!” said the young lady: “some time i’ll tell him so. but
linton and i have no share in your quarrel. i’ll not come here, then;
he shall come to the grange.”

“it will be too far for me,” murmured her cousin: “to walk four miles
would kill me. no, come here, miss catherine, now and then: not every
morning, but once or twice a week.”

the father launched towards his son a glance of bitter contempt.

“i am afraid, nelly, i shall lose my labour,” he muttered to me. “miss
catherine, as the ninny calls her, will discover his value, and send
him to the devil. now, if it had been hareton!—do you know that, twenty
times a day, i covet hareton, with all his degradation? i’d have loved
the lad had he been some one else. but i think he’s safe from _her_
love. i’ll pit him against that paltry creature, unless it bestir
itself briskly. we calculate it will scarcely last till it is eighteen.
oh, confound the vapid thing! he’s absorbed in drying his feet, and
never looks at her.—linton!”

“yes, father,” answered the boy.

“have you nothing to show your cousin anywhere about, not even a rabbit
or a weasel’s nest? take her into the garden, before you change your
shoes; and into the stable to see your horse.”

“wouldn’t you rather sit here?” asked linton, addressing cathy in a
tone which expressed reluctance to move again.

“i don’t know,” she replied, casting a longing look to the door, and
evidently eager to be active.

he kept his seat, and shrank closer to the fire. heathcliff rose, and
went into the kitchen, and from thence to the yard, calling out for
hareton. hareton responded, and presently the two re-entered. the young
man had been washing himself, as was visible by the glow on his cheeks
and his wetted hair.

“oh, i’ll ask _you_, uncle,” cried miss cathy, recollecting the
housekeeper’s assertion. “that is not my cousin, is he?”

“yes,” he replied, “your mother’s nephew. don’t you like him?”

catherine looked queer.

“is he not a handsome lad?” he continued.

the uncivil little thing stood on tiptoe, and whispered a sentence in
heathcliff’s ear. he laughed; hareton darkened: i perceived he was very
sensitive to suspected slights, and had obviously a dim notion of his
inferiority. but his master or guardian chased the frown by exclaiming—

“you’ll be the favourite among us, hareton! she says you are a—what was
it? well, something very flattering. here! you go with her round the
farm. and behave like a gentleman, mind! don’t use any bad words; and
don’t stare when the young lady is not looking at you, and be ready to
hide your face when she is; and, when you speak, say your words slowly,
and keep your hands out of your pockets. be off, and entertain her as
nicely as you can.”

he watched the couple walking past the window. earnshaw had his
countenance completely averted from his companion. he seemed studying
the familiar landscape with a stranger’s and an artist’s interest.
catherine took a sly look at him, expressing small admiration. she then
turned her attention to seeking out objects of amusement for herself,
and tripped merrily on, lilting a tune to supply the lack of
conversation.

“i’ve tied his tongue,” observed heathcliff. “he’ll not venture a
single syllable all the time! nelly, you recollect me at his age—nay,
some years younger. did i ever look so stupid: so ‘gaumless,’ as joseph
calls it?”

“worse,” i replied, “because more sullen with it.”

“i’ve a pleasure in him,” he continued, reflecting aloud. “he has
satisfied my expectations. if he were a born fool i should not enjoy it
half so much. but he’s no fool; and i can sympathise with all his
feelings, having felt them myself. i know what he suffers now, for
instance, exactly: it is merely a beginning of what he shall suffer,
though. and he’ll never be able to emerge from his bathos of coarseness
and ignorance. i’ve got him faster than his scoundrel of a father
secured me, and lower; for he takes a pride in his brutishness. i’ve
taught him to scorn everything extra-animal as silly and weak. don’t
you think hindley would be proud of his son, if he could see him?
almost as proud as i am of mine. but there’s this difference; one is
gold put to the use of paving-stones, and the other is tin polished to
ape a service of silver. _mine_ has nothing valuable about it; yet i
shall have the merit of making it go as far as such poor stuff can go.
_his_ had first-rate qualities, and they are lost: rendered worse than
unavailing. _i_ have nothing to regret; _he_ would have more than any,
but i, are aware of. and the best of it is, hareton is damnably fond of
me! you’ll own that i’ve outmatched hindley there. if the dead villain
could rise from his grave to abuse me for his offspring’s wrongs, i
should have the fun of seeing the said offspring fight him back again,
indignant that he should dare to rail at the one friend he has in the
world!”

heathcliff chuckled a fiendish laugh at the idea. i made no reply,
because i saw that he expected none. meantime, our young companion, who
sat too removed from us to hear what was said, began to evince symptoms
of uneasiness, probably repenting that he had denied himself the treat
of catherine’s society for fear of a little fatigue. his father
remarked the restless glances wandering to the window, and the hand
irresolutely extended towards his cap.

“get up, you idle boy!” he exclaimed, with assumed heartiness. “away
after them! they are just at the corner, by the stand of hives.”

linton gathered his energies, and left the hearth. the lattice was
open, and, as he stepped out, i heard cathy inquiring of her unsociable
attendant what was that inscription over the door? hareton stared up,
and scratched his head like a true clown.

“it’s some damnable writing,” he answered. “i cannot read it.”

“can’t read it?” cried catherine; “i can read it: it’s english. but i
want to know why it is there.”

linton giggled: the first appearance of mirth he had exhibited.

“he does not know his letters,” he said to his cousin. “could you
believe in the existence of such a colossal dunce?”

“is he all as he should be?” asked miss cathy, seriously; “or is he
simple: not right? i’ve questioned him twice now, and each time he
looked so stupid i think he does not understand me. i can hardly
understand _him_, i’m sure!”

linton repeated his laugh, and glanced at hareton tauntingly; who
certainly did not seem quite clear of comprehension at that moment.

“there’s nothing the matter but laziness; is there, earnshaw?” he said.
“my cousin fancies you are an idiot. there you experience the
consequence of scorning ‘book-larning,’ as you would say. have you
noticed, catherine, his frightful yorkshire pronunciation?”

“why, where the devil is the use on’t?” growled hareton, more ready in
answering his daily companion. he was about to enlarge further, but the
two youngsters broke into a noisy fit of merriment: my giddy miss being
delighted to discover that she might turn his strange talk to matter of
amusement.

“where is the use of the devil in that sentence?” tittered linton.
“papa told you not to say any bad words, and you can’t open your mouth
without one. do try to behave like a gentleman, now do!”

“if thou weren’t more a lass than a lad, i’d fell thee this minute, i
would; pitiful lath of a crater!” retorted the angry boor, retreating,
while his face burnt with mingled rage and mortification; for he was
conscious of being insulted, and embarrassed how to resent it.

mr. heathcliff having overheard the conversation, as well as i, smiled
when he saw him go; but immediately afterwards cast a look of singular
aversion on the flippant pair, who remained chattering in the doorway:
the boy finding animation enough while discussing hareton’s faults and
deficiencies, and relating anecdotes of his goings on; and the girl
relishing his pert and spiteful sayings, without considering the
ill-nature they evinced. i began to dislike, more than to compassionate
linton, and to excuse his father in some measure for holding him cheap.

we stayed till afternoon: i could not tear miss cathy away sooner; but
happily my master had not quitted his apartment, and remained ignorant
of our prolonged absence. as we walked home, i would fain have
enlightened my charge on the characters of the people we had quitted:
but she got it into her head that i was prejudiced against them.

“aha!” she cried, “you take papa’s side, ellen: you are partial i know;
or else you wouldn’t have cheated me so many years into the notion that
linton lived a long way from here. i’m really extremely angry; only i’m
so pleased i can’t show it! but you must hold your tongue about my
uncle; he’s _my_ uncle, remember; and i’ll scold papa for quarrelling
with him.”

and so she ran on, till i relinquished the endeavour to convince her of
her mistake. she did not mention the visit that night, because she did
not see mr. linton. next day it all came out, sadly to my chagrin; and
still i was not altogether sorry: i thought the burden of directing and
warning would be more efficiently borne by him than me. but he was too
timid in giving satisfactory reasons for his wish that she should shun
connection with the household of the heights, and catherine liked good
reasons for every restraint that harassed her petted will.

“papa!” she exclaimed, after the morning’s salutations, “guess whom i
saw yesterday, in my walk on the moors. ah, papa, you started! you’ve
not done right, have you, now? i saw—but listen, and you shall hear how
i found you out; and ellen, who is in league with you, and yet
pretended to pity me so, when i kept hoping, and was always
disappointed about linton’s coming back!”

she gave a faithful account of her excursion and its consequences; and
my master, though he cast more than one reproachful look at me, said
nothing till she had concluded. then he drew her to him, and asked if
she knew why he had concealed linton’s near neighbourhood from her?
could she think it was to deny her a pleasure that she might harmlessly
enjoy?

“it was because you disliked mr. heathcliff,” she answered.

“then you believe i care more for my own feelings than yours, cathy?”
he said. “no, it was not because i disliked mr. heathcliff, but because
mr. heathcliff dislikes me; and is a most diabolical man, delighting to
wrong and ruin those he hates, if they give him the slightest
opportunity. i knew that you could not keep up an acquaintance with
your cousin without being brought into contact with him; and i knew he
would detest you on my account; so for your own good, and nothing else,
i took precautions that you should not see linton again. i meant to
explain this some time as you grew older, and i’m sorry i delayed it.”

“but mr. heathcliff was quite cordial, papa,” observed catherine, not
at all convinced; “and _he_ didn’t object to our seeing each other: he
said i might come to his house when i pleased; only i must not tell
you, because you had quarrelled with him, and would not forgive him for
marrying aunt isabella. and you won’t. _you_ are the one to be blamed:
he is willing to let _us_ be friends, at least; linton and i; and you
are not.”

my master, perceiving that she would not take his word for her
uncle-in-law’s evil disposition, gave a hasty sketch of his conduct to
isabella, and the manner in which wuthering heights became his
property. he could not bear to discourse long upon the topic; for
though he spoke little of it, he still felt the same horror and
detestation of his ancient enemy that had occupied his heart ever since
mrs. linton’s death. “she might have been living yet, if it had not
been for him!” was his constant bitter reflection; and, in his eyes,
heathcliff seemed a murderer. miss cathy—conversant with no bad deeds
except her own slight acts of disobedience, injustice, and passion,
arising from hot temper and thoughtlessness, and repented of on the day
they were committed—was amazed at the blackness of spirit that could
brood on and cover revenge for years, and deliberately prosecute its
plans without a visitation of remorse. she appeared so deeply impressed
and shocked at this new view of human nature—excluded from all her
studies and all her ideas till now—that mr. edgar deemed it unnecessary
to pursue the subject. he merely added: “you will know hereafter,
darling, why i wish you to avoid his house and family; now return to
your old employments and amusements, and think no more about them.”

catherine kissed her father, and sat down quietly to her lessons for a
couple of hours, according to custom; then she accompanied him into the
grounds, and the whole day passed as usual: but in the evening, when
she had retired to her room, and i went to help her to undress, i found
her crying, on her knees by the bedside.

“oh, fie, silly child!” i exclaimed. “if you had any real griefs you’d
be ashamed to waste a tear on this little contrariety. you never had
one shadow of substantial sorrow, miss catherine. suppose, for a
minute, that master and i were dead, and you were by yourself in the
world: how would you feel, then? compare the present occasion with such
an affliction as that, and be thankful for the friends you have,
instead of coveting more.”

“i’m not crying for myself, ellen,” she answered, “it’s for him. he
expected to see me again to-morrow, and there he’ll be so disappointed:
and he’ll wait for me, and i sha’n’t come!”

“nonsense!” said i, “do you imagine he has thought as much of you as
you have of him? hasn’t he hareton for a companion? not one in a
hundred would weep at losing a relation they had just seen twice, for
two afternoons. linton will conjecture how it is, and trouble himself
no further about you.”

“but may i not write a note to tell him why i cannot come?” she asked,
rising to her feet. “and just send those books i promised to lend him?
his books are not as nice as mine, and he wanted to have them
extremely, when i told him how interesting they were. may i not,
ellen?”

“no, indeed! no, indeed!” replied i with decision. “then he would write
to you, and there’d never be an end of it. no, miss catherine, the
acquaintance must be dropped entirely: so papa expects, and i shall see
that it is done.”

“but how can one little note—?” she recommenced, putting on an
imploring countenance.

“silence!” i interrupted. “we’ll not begin with your little notes. get
into bed.”

she threw at me a very naughty look, so naughty that i would not kiss
her good-night at first: i covered her up, and shut her door, in great
displeasure; but, repenting half-way, i returned softly, and lo! there
was miss standing at the table with a bit of blank paper before her and
a pencil in her hand, which she guiltily slipped out of sight on my
entrance.

“you’ll get nobody to take that, catherine,” i said, “if you write it;
and at present i shall put out your candle.”

i set the extinguisher on the flame, receiving as i did so a slap on my
hand and a petulant “cross thing!” i then quitted her again, and she
drew the bolt in one of her worst, most peevish humours. the letter was
finished and forwarded to its destination by a milk-fetcher who came
from the village; but that i didn’t learn till some time afterwards.
weeks passed on, and cathy recovered her temper; though she grew
wondrous fond of stealing off to corners by herself; and often, if i
came near her suddenly while reading, she would start and bend over the
book, evidently desirous to hide it; and i detected edges of loose
paper sticking out beyond the leaves. she also got a trick of coming
down early in the morning and lingering about the kitchen, as if she
were expecting the arrival of something; and she had a small drawer in
a cabinet in the library, which she would trifle over for hours, and
whose key she took special care to remove when she left it.

one day, as she inspected this drawer, i observed that the playthings
and trinkets which recently formed its contents were transmuted into
bits of folded paper. my curiosity and suspicions were roused; i
determined to take a peep at her mysterious treasures; so, at night, as
soon as she and my master were safe upstairs, i searched, and readily
found among my house keys one that would fit the lock. having opened, i
emptied the whole contents into my apron, and took them with me to
examine at leisure in my own chamber. though i could not but suspect, i
was still surprised to discover that they were a mass of
correspondence—daily almost, it must have been—from linton heathcliff:
answers to documents forwarded by her. the earlier dated were
embarrassed and short; gradually, however, they expanded into copious
love-letters, foolish, as the age of the writer rendered natural, yet
with touches here and there which i thought were borrowed from a more
experienced source. some of them struck me as singularly odd compounds
of ardour and flatness; commencing in strong feeling, and concluding in
the affected, wordy style that a schoolboy might use to a fancied,
incorporeal sweetheart. whether they satisfied cathy i don’t know; but
they appeared very worthless trash to me. after turning over as many as
i thought proper, i tied them in a handkerchief and set them aside,
relocking the vacant drawer.

following her habit, my young lady descended early, and visited the
kitchen: i watched her go to the door, on the arrival of a certain
little boy; and, while the dairymaid filled his can, she tucked
something into his jacket pocket, and plucked something out. i went
round by the garden, and laid wait for the messenger; who fought
valorously to defend his trust, and we spilt the milk between us; but i
succeeded in abstracting the epistle; and, threatening serious
consequences if he did not look sharp home, i remained under the wall
and perused miss cathy’s affectionate composition. it was more simple
and more eloquent than her cousin’s: very pretty and very silly. i
shook my head, and went meditating into the house. the day being wet,
she could not divert herself with rambling about the park; so, at the
conclusion of her morning studies, she resorted to the solace of the
drawer. her father sat reading at the table; and i, on purpose, had
sought a bit of work in some unripped fringes of the window-curtain,
keeping my eye steadily fixed on her proceedings. never did any bird
flying back to a plundered nest, which it had left brimful of chirping
young ones, express more complete despair, in its anguished cries and
flutterings, than she by her single “oh!” and the change that
transfigured her late happy countenance. mr. linton looked up.

“what is the matter, love? have you hurt yourself?” he said.

his tone and look assured her _he_ had not been the discoverer of the
hoard.

“no, papa!” she gasped. “ellen! ellen! come upstairs—i’m sick!”

i obeyed her summons, and accompanied her out.

“oh, ellen! you have got them,” she commenced immediately, dropping on
her knees, when we were enclosed alone. “oh, give them to me, and i’ll
never, never do so again! don’t tell papa. you have not told papa,
ellen? say you have not? i’ve been exceedingly naughty, but i won’t do
it any more!”

with a grave severity in my manner i bade her stand up.

“so,” i exclaimed, “miss catherine, you are tolerably far on, it seems:
you may well be ashamed of them! a fine bundle of trash you study in
your leisure hours, to be sure: why, it’s good enough to be printed!
and what do you suppose the master will think when i display it before
him? i hav’n’t shown it yet, but you needn’t imagine i shall keep your
ridiculous secrets. for shame! and you must have led the way in writing
such absurdities: he would not have thought of beginning, i’m certain.”

“i didn’t! i didn’t!” sobbed cathy, fit to break her heart. “i didn’t
once think of loving him till—”

“_loving_!” cried i, as scornfully as i could utter the word.
“_loving_! did anybody ever hear the like! i might just as well talk of
loving the miller who comes once a year to buy our corn. pretty loving,
indeed! and both times together you have seen linton hardly four hours
in your life! now here is the babyish trash. i’m going with it to the
library; and we’ll see what your father says to such _loving_.”

she sprang at her precious epistles, but i held them above my head; and
then she poured out further frantic entreaties that i would burn
them—do anything rather than show them. and being really fully as much
inclined to laugh as scold—for i esteemed it all girlish vanity—i at
length relented in a measure, and asked,—“if i consent to burn them,
will you promise faithfully neither to send nor receive a letter again,
nor a book (for i perceive you have sent him books), nor locks of hair,
nor rings, nor playthings?”

“we don’t send playthings,” cried catherine, her pride overcoming her
shame.

“nor anything at all, then, my lady?” i said. “unless you will, here i
go.”

“i promise, ellen!” she cried, catching my dress. “oh, put them in the
fire, do, do!”

but when i proceeded to open a place with the poker the sacrifice was
too painful to be borne. she earnestly supplicated that i would spare
her one or two.

“one or two, ellen, to keep for linton’s sake!”

i unknotted the handkerchief, and commenced dropping them in from an
angle, and the flame curled up the chimney.

“i will have one, you cruel wretch!” she screamed, darting her hand
into the fire, and drawing forth some half-consumed fragments, at the
expense of her fingers.

“very well—and i will have some to exhibit to papa!” i answered,
shaking back the rest into the bundle, and turning anew to the door.

she emptied her blackened pieces into the flames, and motioned me to
finish the immolation. it was done; i stirred up the ashes, and
interred them under a shovelful of coals; and she mutely, and with a
sense of intense injury, retired to her private apartment. i descended
to tell my master that the young lady’s qualm of sickness was almost
gone, but i judged it best for her to lie down a while. she wouldn’t
dine; but she reappeared at tea, pale, and red about the eyes, and
marvellously subdued in outward aspect. next morning i answered the
letter by a slip of paper, inscribed, “master heathcliff is requested
to send no more notes to miss linton, as she will not receive them.”
and, thenceforth, the little boy came with vacant pockets.




chapter xxii


summer drew to an end, and early autumn: it was past michaelmas, but
the harvest was late that year, and a few of our fields were still
uncleared. mr. linton and his daughter would frequently walk out among
the reapers; at the carrying of the last sheaves they stayed till dusk,
and the evening happening to be chill and damp, my master caught a bad
cold, that settled obstinately on his lungs, and confined him indoors
throughout the whole of the winter, nearly without intermission.

poor cathy, frightened from her little romance, had been considerably
sadder and duller since its abandonment; and her father insisted on her
reading less, and taking more exercise. she had his companionship no
longer; i esteemed it a duty to supply its lack, as much as possible,
with mine: an inefficient substitute; for i could only spare two or
three hours, from my numerous diurnal occupations, to follow her
footsteps, and then my society was obviously less desirable than his.

on an afternoon in october, or the beginning of november—a fresh watery
afternoon, when the turf and paths were rustling with moist, withered
leaves, and the cold blue sky was half hidden by clouds—dark grey
streamers, rapidly mounting from the west, and boding abundant rain—i
requested my young lady to forego her ramble, because i was certain of
showers. she refused; and i unwillingly donned a cloak, and took my
umbrella to accompany her on a stroll to the bottom of the park: a
formal walk which she generally affected if low-spirited—and that she
invariably was when mr. edgar had been worse than ordinary, a thing
never known from his confession, but guessed both by her and me from
his increased silence and the melancholy of his countenance. she went
sadly on: there was no running or bounding now, though the chill wind
might well have tempted her to race. and often, from the side of my
eye, i could detect her raising a hand, and brushing something off her
cheek. i gazed round for a means of diverting her thoughts. on one side
of the road rose a high, rough bank, where hazels and stunted oaks,
with their roots half exposed, held uncertain tenure: the soil was too
loose for the latter; and strong winds had blown some nearly
horizontal. in summer miss catherine delighted to climb along these
trunks, and sit in the branches, swinging twenty feet above the ground;
and i, pleased with her agility and her light, childish heart, still
considered it proper to scold every time i caught her at such an
elevation, but so that she knew there was no necessity for descending.
from dinner to tea she would lie in her breeze-rocked cradle, doing
nothing except singing old songs—my nursery lore—to herself, or
watching the birds, joint tenants, feed and entice their young ones to
fly: or nestling with closed lids, half thinking, half dreaming,
happier than words can express.

“look, miss!” i exclaimed, pointing to a nook under the roots of one
twisted tree. “winter is not here yet. there’s a little flower up
yonder, the last bud from the multitude of bluebells that clouded those
turf steps in july with a lilac mist. will you clamber up, and pluck it
to show to papa?”

cathy stared a long time at the lonely blossom trembling in its earthy
shelter, and replied, at length—“no, i’ll not touch it: but it looks
melancholy, does it not, ellen?”

“yes,” i observed, “about as starved and sackless as you: your cheeks
are bloodless; let us take hold of hands and run. you’re so low, i
daresay i shall keep up with you.”

“no,” she repeated, and continued sauntering on, pausing at intervals
to muse over a bit of moss, or a tuft of blanched grass, or a fungus
spreading its bright orange among the heaps of brown foliage; and, ever
and anon, her hand was lifted to her averted face.

“catherine, why are you crying, love?” i asked, approaching and putting
my arm over her shoulder. “you mustn’t cry because papa has a cold; be
thankful it is nothing worse.”

she now put no further restraint on her tears; her breath was stifled
by sobs.

“oh, it _will_ be something worse,” she said. “and what shall i do when
papa and you leave me, and i am by myself? i can’t forget your words,
ellen; they are always in my ear. how life will be changed, how dreary
the world will be, when papa and you are dead.”

“none can tell whether you won’t die before us,” i replied. “it’s wrong
to anticipate evil. we’ll hope there are years and years to come before
any of us go: master is young, and i am strong, and hardly forty-five.
my mother lived till eighty, a canty dame to the last. and suppose mr.
linton were spared till he saw sixty, that would be more years than you
have counted, miss. and would it not be foolish to mourn a calamity
above twenty years beforehand?”

“but aunt isabella was younger than papa,” she remarked, gazing up with
timid hope to seek further consolation.

“aunt isabella had not you and me to nurse her,” i replied. “she wasn’t
as happy as master: she hadn’t as much to live for. all you need do, is
to wait well on your father, and cheer him by letting him see you
cheerful; and avoid giving him anxiety on any subject: mind that,
cathy! i’ll not disguise but you might kill him if you were wild and
reckless, and cherished a foolish, fanciful affection for the son of a
person who would be glad to have him in his grave; and allowed him to
discover that you fretted over the separation he has judged it
expedient to make.”

“i fret about nothing on earth except papa’s illness,” answered my
companion. “i care for nothing in comparison with papa. and i’ll
never—never—oh, never, while i have my senses, do an act or say a word
to vex him. i love him better than myself, ellen; and i know it by
this: i pray every night that i may live after him; because i would
rather be miserable than that he should be: that proves i love him
better than myself.”

“good words,” i replied. “but deeds must prove it also; and after he is
well, remember you don’t forget resolutions formed in the hour of
fear.”

as we talked, we neared a door that opened on the road; and my young
lady, lightening into sunshine again, climbed up and seated herself on
the top of the wall, reaching over to gather some hips that bloomed
scarlet on the summit branches of the wild-rose trees shadowing the
highway side: the lower fruit had disappeared, but only birds could
touch the upper, except from cathy’s present station. in stretching to
pull them, her hat fell off; and as the door was locked, she proposed
scrambling down to recover it. i bid her be cautious lest she got a
fall, and she nimbly disappeared. but the return was no such easy
matter: the stones were smooth and neatly cemented, and the rosebushes
and blackberry stragglers could yield no assistance in re-ascending.
i, like a fool, didn’t recollect that, till i heard her laughing and
exclaiming—“ellen! you’ll have to fetch the key, or else i must run
round to the porter’s lodge. i can’t scale the ramparts on this side!”

“stay where you are,” i answered; “i have my bundle of keys in my
pocket: perhaps i may manage to open it; if not, i’ll go.”

catherine amused herself with dancing to and fro before the door, while
i tried all the large keys in succession. i had applied the last, and
found that none would do; so, repeating my desire that she would remain
there, i was about to hurry home as fast as i could, when an
approaching sound arrested me. it was the trot of a horse; cathy’s
dance stopped also.

“who is that?” i whispered.

“ellen, i wish you could open the door,” whispered back my companion,
anxiously.

“ho, miss linton!” cried a deep voice (the rider’s), “i’m glad to meet
you. don’t be in haste to enter, for i have an explanation to ask and
obtain.”

“i sha’n’t speak to you, mr. heathcliff,” answered catherine. “papa
says you are a wicked man, and you hate both him and me; and ellen says
the same.”

“that is nothing to the purpose,” said heathcliff. (he it was.) “i
don’t hate my son, i suppose; and it is concerning him that i demand
your attention. yes; you have cause to blush. two or three months
since, were you not in the habit of writing to linton? making love in
play, eh? you deserved, both of you, flogging for that! you especially,
the elder; and less sensitive, as it turns out. i’ve got your letters,
and if you give me any pertness i’ll send them to your father. i
presume you grew weary of the amusement and dropped it, didn’t you?
well, you dropped linton with it into a slough of despond. he was in
earnest: in love, really. as true as i live, he’s dying for you;
breaking his heart at your fickleness: not figuratively, but actually.
though hareton has made him a standing jest for six weeks, and i have
used more serious measures, and attempted to frighten him out of his
idiocy, he gets worse daily; and he’ll be under the sod before summer,
unless you restore him!”

“how can you lie so glaringly to the poor child?” i called from the
inside. “pray ride on! how can you deliberately get up such paltry
falsehoods? miss cathy, i’ll knock the lock off with a stone: you won’t
believe that vile nonsense. you can feel in yourself it is impossible
that a person should die for love of a stranger.”

“i was not aware there were eavesdroppers,” muttered the detected
villain. “worthy mrs. dean, i like you, but i don’t like your
double-dealing,” he added aloud. “how could _you_ lie so glaringly as
to affirm i hated the ‘poor child’? and invent bugbear stories to
terrify her from my door-stones? catherine linton (the very name warms
me), my bonny lass, i shall be from home all this week; go and see if i
have not spoken truth: do, there’s a darling! just imagine your father
in my place, and linton in yours; then think how you would value your
careless lover if he refused to stir a step to comfort you, when your
father himself entreated him; and don’t, from pure stupidity, fall into
the same error. i swear, on my salvation, he’s going to his grave, and
none but you can save him!”

the lock gave way and i issued out.

“i swear linton is dying,” repeated heathcliff, looking hard at me.
“and grief and disappointment are hastening his death. nelly, if you
won’t let her go, you can walk over yourself. but i shall not return
till this time next week; and i think your master himself would
scarcely object to her visiting her cousin.”

“come in,” said i, taking cathy by the arm and half forcing her to
re-enter; for she lingered, viewing with troubled eyes the features of
the speaker, too stern to express his inward deceit.

he pushed his horse close, and, bending down, observed—

“miss catherine, i’ll own to you that i have little patience with
linton; and hareton and joseph have less. i’ll own that he’s with a
harsh set. he pines for kindness, as well as love; and a kind word from
you would be his best medicine. don’t mind mrs. dean’s cruel cautions;
but be generous, and contrive to see him. he dreams of you day and
night, and cannot be persuaded that you don’t hate him, since you
neither write nor call.”

i closed the door, and rolled a stone to assist the loosened lock in
holding it; and spreading my umbrella, i drew my charge underneath: for
the rain began to drive through the moaning branches of the trees, and
warned us to avoid delay. our hurry prevented any comment on the
encounter with heathcliff, as we stretched towards home; but i divined
instinctively that catherine’s heart was clouded now in double
darkness. her features were so sad, they did not seem hers: she
evidently regarded what she had heard as every syllable true.

the master had retired to rest before we came in. cathy stole to his
room to inquire how he was; he had fallen asleep. she returned, and
asked me to sit with her in the library. we took our tea together; and
afterwards she lay down on the rug, and told me not to talk, for she
was weary. i got a book, and pretended to read. as soon as she supposed
me absorbed in my occupation, she recommenced her silent weeping: it
appeared, at present, her favourite diversion. i suffered her to enjoy
it a while; then i expostulated: deriding and ridiculing all mr.
heathcliff’s assertions about his son, as if i were certain she would
coincide. alas! i hadn’t skill to counteract the effect his account had
produced: it was just what he intended.

“you may be right, ellen,” she answered; “but i shall never feel at
ease till i know. and i must tell linton it is not my fault that i
don’t write, and convince him that i shall not change.”

what use were anger and protestations against her silly credulity? we
parted that night—hostile; but next day beheld me on the road to
wuthering heights, by the side of my wilful young mistress’s pony. i
couldn’t bear to witness her sorrow: to see her pale, dejected
countenance, and heavy eyes: and i yielded, in the faint hope that
linton himself might prove, by his reception of us, how little of the
tale was founded on fact.




chapter xxiii


the rainy night had ushered in a misty morning—half frost, half
drizzle—and temporary brooks crossed our path—gurgling from the
uplands. my feet were thoroughly wetted; i was cross and low; exactly
the humour suited for making the most of these disagreeable things. we
entered the farm-house by the kitchen way, to ascertain whether mr.
heathcliff were really absent: because i put slight faith in his own
affirmation.

joseph seemed sitting in a sort of elysium alone, beside a roaring
fire; a quart of ale on the table near him, bristling with large pieces
of toasted oat-cake; and his black, short pipe in his mouth. catherine
ran to the hearth to warm herself. i asked if the master was in? my
question remained so long unanswered, that i thought the old man had
grown deaf, and repeated it louder.

“na—ay!” he snarled, or rather screamed through his nose. “na—ay! yah
muh goa back whear yah coom frough.”

“joseph!” cried a peevish voice, simultaneously with me, from the inner
room. “how often am i to call you? there are only a few red ashes now.
joseph! come this moment.”

vigorous puffs, and a resolute stare into the grate, declared he had no
ear for this appeal. the housekeeper and hareton were invisible; one
gone on an errand, and the other at his work, probably. we knew
linton’s tones, and entered.

“oh, i hope you’ll die in a garret, starved to death!” said the boy,
mistaking our approach for that of his negligent attendant.

he stopped on observing his error: his cousin flew to him.

“is that you, miss linton?” he said, raising his head from the arm of
the great chair, in which he reclined. “no—don’t kiss me: it takes my
breath. dear me! papa said you would call,” continued he, after
recovering a little from catherine’s embrace; while she stood by
looking very contrite. “will you shut the door, if you please? you left
it open; and those—those _detestable_ creatures won’t bring coals to
the fire. it’s so cold!”

i stirred up the cinders, and fetched a scuttleful myself. the invalid
complained of being covered with ashes; but he had a tiresome cough,
and looked feverish and ill, so i did not rebuke his temper.

“well, linton,” murmured catherine, when his corrugated brow relaxed,
“are you glad to see me? can i do you any good?”

“why didn’t you come before?” he asked. “you should have come, instead
of writing. it tired me dreadfully writing those long letters. i’d far
rather have talked to you. now, i can neither bear to talk, nor
anything else. i wonder where zillah is! will you” (looking at me)
“step into the kitchen and see?”

i had received no thanks for my other service; and being unwilling to
run to and fro at his behest, i replied—

“nobody is out there but joseph.”

“i want to drink,” he exclaimed fretfully, turning away. “zillah is
constantly gadding off to gimmerton since papa went: it’s miserable!
and i’m obliged to come down here—they resolved never to hear me
upstairs.”

“is your father attentive to you, master heathcliff?” i asked,
perceiving catherine to be checked in her friendly advances.

“attentive? he makes _them_ a little more attentive at least,” he
cried. “the wretches! do you know, miss linton, that brute hareton
laughs at me! i hate him! indeed, i hate them all: they are odious
beings.”

cathy began searching for some water; she lighted on a pitcher in the
dresser, filled a tumbler, and brought it. he bid her add a spoonful of
wine from a bottle on the table; and having swallowed a small portion,
appeared more tranquil, and said she was very kind.

“and are you glad to see me?” asked she, reiterating her former
question, and pleased to detect the faint dawn of a smile.

“yes, i am. it’s something new to hear a voice like yours!” he replied.
“but i have been vexed, because you wouldn’t come. and papa swore it
was owing to me: he called me a pitiful, shuffling, worthless thing;
and said you despised me; and if he had been in my place, he would be
more the master of the grange than your father by this time. but you
don’t despise me, do you, miss—?”

“i wish you would say catherine, or cathy,” interrupted my young lady.
“despise you? no! next to papa and ellen, i love you better than
anybody living. i don’t love mr. heathcliff, though; and i dare not
come when he returns: will he stay away many days?”

“not many,” answered linton; “but he goes on to the moors frequently,
since the shooting season commenced; and you might spend an hour or two
with me in his absence. do say you will. i think i should not be
peevish with you: you’d not provoke me, and you’d always be ready to
help me, wouldn’t you?”

“yes,” said catherine, stroking his long soft hair, “if i could only
get papa’s consent, i’d spend half my time with you. pretty linton! i
wish you were my brother.”

“and then you would like me as well as your father?” observed he, more
cheerfully. “but papa says you would love me better than him and all
the world, if you were my wife; so i’d rather you were that.”

“no, i should never love anybody better than papa,” she returned
gravely. “and people hate their wives, sometimes; but not their sisters
and brothers: and if you were the latter, you would live with us, and
papa would be as fond of you as he is of me.”

linton denied that people ever hated their wives; but cathy affirmed
they did, and, in her wisdom, instanced his own father’s aversion to
her aunt. i endeavoured to stop her thoughtless tongue. i couldn’t
succeed till everything she knew was out. master heathcliff, much
irritated, asserted her relation was false.

“papa told me; and papa does not tell falsehoods,” she answered pertly.

“_my_ papa scorns yours!” cried linton. “he calls him a sneaking fool.”

“yours is a wicked man,” retorted catherine; “and you are very naughty
to dare to repeat what he says. he must be wicked to have made aunt
isabella leave him as she did.”

“she didn’t leave him,” said the boy; “you sha’n’t contradict me.”

“she did,” cried my young lady.

“well, i’ll tell _you_ something!” said linton. “your mother hated your
father: now then.”

“oh!” exclaimed catherine, too enraged to continue.

“and she loved mine,” added he.

“you little liar! i hate you now!” she panted, and her face grew red
with passion.

“she did! she did!” sang linton, sinking into the recess of his chair,
and leaning back his head to enjoy the agitation of the other
disputant, who stood behind.

“hush, master heathcliff!” i said; “that’s your father’s tale, too, i
suppose.”

“it isn’t: you hold your tongue!” he answered. “she did, she did,
catherine! she did, she did!”

cathy, beside herself, gave the chair a violent push, and caused him to
fall against one arm. he was immediately seized by a suffocating cough
that soon ended his triumph. it lasted so long that it frightened even
me. as to his cousin, she wept with all her might, aghast at the
mischief she had done: though she said nothing. i held him till the fit
exhausted itself. then he thrust me away, and leant his head down
silently. catherine quelled her lamentations also, took a seat
opposite, and looked solemnly into the fire.

“how do you feel now, master heathcliff?” i inquired, after waiting ten
minutes.

“i wish _she_ felt as i do,” he replied: “spiteful, cruel thing!
hareton never touches me: he never struck me in his life. and i was
better to-day: and there—” his voice died in a whimper.

“_i_ didn’t strike you!” muttered cathy, chewing her lip to prevent
another burst of emotion.

he sighed and moaned like one under great suffering, and kept it up for
a quarter of an hour; on purpose to distress his cousin apparently, for
whenever he caught a stifled sob from her he put renewed pain and
pathos into the inflexions of his voice.

“i’m sorry i hurt you, linton,” she said at length, racked beyond
endurance. “but _i_ couldn’t have been hurt by that little push, and i
had no idea that you could, either: you’re not much, are you, linton?
don’t let me go home thinking i’ve done you harm. answer! speak to me.”

“i can’t speak to you,” he murmured; “you’ve hurt me so that i shall
lie awake all night choking with this cough. if you had it you’d know
what it was; but _you’ll_ be comfortably asleep while i’m in agony, and
nobody near me. i wonder how you would like to pass those fearful
nights!” and he began to wail aloud, for very pity of himself.

“since you are in the habit of passing dreadful nights,” i said, “it
won’t be miss who spoils your ease: you’d be the same had she never
come. however, she shall not disturb you again; and perhaps you’ll get
quieter when we leave you.”

“must i go?” asked catherine dolefully, bending over him. “do you want
me to go, linton?”

“you can’t alter what you’ve done,” he replied pettishly, shrinking
from her, “unless you alter it for the worse by teasing me into a
fever.”

“well, then, i must go?” she repeated.

“let me alone, at least,” said he; “i can’t bear your talking.”

she lingered, and resisted my persuasions to departure a tiresome
while; but as he neither looked up nor spoke, she finally made a
movement to the door, and i followed. we were recalled by a scream.
linton had slid from his seat on to the hearthstone, and lay writhing
in the mere perverseness of an indulged plague of a child, determined
to be as grievous and harassing as it can. i thoroughly gauged his
disposition from his behaviour, and saw at once it would be folly to
attempt humouring him. not so my companion: she ran back in terror,
knelt down, and cried, and soothed, and entreated, till he grew quiet
from lack of breath: by no means from compunction at distressing her.

“i shall lift him on to the settle,” i said, “and he may roll about as
he pleases: we can’t stop to watch him. i hope you are satisfied, miss
cathy, that _you_ are not the person to benefit him; and that his
condition of health is not occasioned by attachment to you. now, then,
there he is! come away: as soon as he knows there is nobody by to care
for his nonsense, he’ll be glad to lie still.”

she placed a cushion under his head, and offered him some water; he
rejected the latter, and tossed uneasily on the former, as if it were a
stone or a block of wood. she tried to put it more comfortably.

“i can’t do with that,” he said; “it’s not high enough.”

catherine brought another to lay above it.

“that’s _too_ high,” murmured the provoking thing.

“how must i arrange it, then?” she asked despairingly.

he twined himself up to her, as she half knelt by the settle, and
converted her shoulder into a support.

“no, that won’t do,” i said. “you’ll be content with the cushion,
master heathcliff. miss has wasted too much time on you already: we
cannot remain five minutes longer.”

“yes, yes, we can!” replied cathy. “he’s good and patient now. he’s
beginning to think i shall have far greater misery than he will
to-night, if i believe he is the worse for my visit: and then i dare
not come again. tell the truth about it, linton; for i mustn’t come, if
i have hurt you.”

“you must come, to cure me,” he answered. “you ought to come, because
you have hurt me: you know you have extremely! i was not as ill when
you entered as i am at present—was i?”

“but you’ve made yourself ill by crying and being in a passion.—i
didn’t do it all,” said his cousin. “however, we’ll be friends now. and
you want me: you would wish to see me sometimes, really?”

“i told you i did,” he replied impatiently. “sit on the settle and let
me lean on your knee. that’s as mamma used to do, whole afternoons
together. sit quite still and don’t talk: but you may sing a song, if
you can sing; or you may say a nice long interesting ballad—one of
those you promised to teach me; or a story. i’d rather have a ballad,
though: begin.”

catherine repeated the longest she could remember. the employment
pleased both mightily. linton would have another, and after that
another, notwithstanding my strenuous objections; and so they went on
until the clock struck twelve, and we heard hareton in the court,
returning for his dinner.

“and to-morrow, catherine, will you be here to-morrow?” asked young
heathcliff, holding her frock as she rose reluctantly.

“no,” i answered, “nor next day neither.” she, however, gave a
different response evidently, for his forehead cleared as she stooped
and whispered in his ear.

“you won’t go to-morrow, recollect, miss!” i commenced, when we were
out of the house. “you are not dreaming of it, are you?”

she smiled.

“oh, i’ll take good care,” i continued: “i’ll have that lock mended,
and you can escape by no way else.”

“i can get over the wall,” she said laughing. “the grange is not a
prison, ellen, and you are not my gaoler. and besides, i’m almost
seventeen: i’m a woman. and i’m certain linton would recover quickly if
he had me to look after him. i’m older than he is, you know, and wiser:
less childish, am i not? and he’ll soon do as i direct him, with some
slight coaxing. he’s a pretty little darling when he’s good. i’d make
such a pet of him, if he were mine. we should never quarrel, should we,
after we were used to each other? don’t you like him, ellen?”

“like him!” i exclaimed. “the worst-tempered bit of a sickly slip that
ever struggled into its teens. happily, as mr. heathcliff conjectured,
he’ll not win twenty. i doubt whether he’ll see spring, indeed. and
small loss to his family whenever he drops off. and lucky it is for us
that his father took him: the kinder he was treated, the more tedious
and selfish he’d be. i’m glad you have no chance of having him for a
husband, miss catherine.”

my companion waxed serious at hearing this speech. to speak of his
death so regardlessly wounded her feelings.

“he’s younger than i,” she answered, after a protracted pause of
meditation, “and he ought to live the longest: he will—he must live as
long as i do. he’s as strong now as when he first came into the north;
i’m positive of that. it’s only a cold that ails him, the same as papa
has. you say papa will get better, and why shouldn’t he?”

“well, well,” i cried, “after all, we needn’t trouble ourselves; for
listen, miss,—and mind, i’ll keep my word,—if you attempt going to
wuthering heights again, with or without me, i shall inform mr. linton,
and, unless he allow it, the intimacy with your cousin must not be
revived.”

“it has been revived,” muttered cathy, sulkily.

“must not be continued, then,” i said.

“we’ll see,” was her reply, and she set off at a gallop, leaving me to
toil in the rear.

we both reached home before our dinner-time; my master supposed we had
been wandering through the park, and therefore he demanded no
explanation of our absence. as soon as i entered i hastened to change
my soaked shoes and stockings; but sitting such a while at the heights
had done the mischief. on the succeeding morning i was laid up, and
during three weeks i remained incapacitated for attending to my duties:
a calamity never experienced prior to that period, and never, i am
thankful to say, since.

my little mistress behaved like an angel in coming to wait on me, and
cheer my solitude; the confinement brought me exceedingly low. it is
wearisome, to a stirring active body: but few have slighter reasons for
complaint than i had. the moment catherine left mr. linton’s room she
appeared at my bedside. her day was divided between us; no amusement
usurped a minute: she neglected her meals, her studies, and her play;
and she was the fondest nurse that ever watched. she must have had a
warm heart, when she loved her father so, to give so much to me. i said
her days were divided between us; but the master retired early, and i
generally needed nothing after six o’clock, thus the evening was her
own. poor thing! i never considered what she did with herself after
tea. and though frequently, when she looked in to bid me good-night, i
remarked a fresh colour in her cheeks and a pinkness over her slender
fingers, instead of fancying the hue borrowed from a cold ride across
the moors, i laid it to the charge of a hot fire in the library.




chapter xxiv


at the close of three weeks i was able to quit my chamber and move
about the house. and on the first occasion of my sitting up in the
evening i asked catherine to read to me, because my eyes were weak. we
were in the library, the master having gone to bed: she consented,
rather unwillingly, i fancied; and imagining my sort of books did not
suit her, i bid her please herself in the choice of what she perused.
she selected one of her own favourites, and got forward steadily about
an hour; then came frequent questions.

“ellen, are not you tired? hadn’t you better lie down now? you’ll be
sick, keeping up so long, ellen.”

“no, no, dear, i’m not tired,” i returned, continually.

perceiving me immovable, she essayed another method of showing her
disrelish for her occupation. it changed to yawning, and stretching,
and—

“ellen, i’m tired.”

“give over then and talk,” i answered.

that was worse: she fretted and sighed, and looked at her watch till
eight, and finally went to her room, completely overdone with sleep;
judging by her peevish, heavy look, and the constant rubbing she
inflicted on her eyes. the following night she seemed more impatient
still; and on the third from recovering my company she complained of a
headache, and left me. i thought her conduct odd; and having remained
alone a long while, i resolved on going and inquiring whether she were
better, and asking her to come and lie on the sofa, instead of upstairs
in the dark. no catherine could i discover upstairs, and none below.
the servants affirmed they had not seen her. i listened at mr. edgar’s
door; all was silence. i returned to her apartment, extinguished my
candle, and seated myself in the window.

the moon shone bright; a sprinkling of snow covered the ground, and i
reflected that she might, possibly, have taken it into her head to walk
about the garden, for refreshment. i did detect a figure creeping along
the inner fence of the park; but it was not my young mistress: on its
emerging into the light, i recognised one of the grooms. he stood a
considerable period, viewing the carriage-road through the grounds;
then started off at a brisk pace, as if he had detected something, and
reappeared presently, leading miss’s pony; and there she was, just
dismounted, and walking by its side. the man took his charge stealthily
across the grass towards the stable. cathy entered by the
casement-window of the drawing-room, and glided noiselessly up to where
i awaited her. she put the door gently to, slipped off her snowy
shoes, untied her hat, and was proceeding, unconscious of my espionage,
to lay aside her mantle, when i suddenly rose and revealed myself. the
surprise petrified her an instant: she uttered an inarticulate
exclamation, and stood fixed.

“my dear miss catherine,” i began, too vividly impressed by her recent
kindness to break into a scold, “where have you been riding out at this
hour? and why should you try to deceive me by telling a tale? where
have you been? speak!”

“to the bottom of the park,” she stammered. “i didn’t tell a tale.”

“and nowhere else?” i demanded.

“no,” was the muttered reply.

“oh, catherine!” i cried, sorrowfully. “you know you have been doing
wrong, or you wouldn’t be driven to uttering an untruth to me. that
does grieve me. i’d rather be three months ill, than hear you frame a
deliberate lie.”

she sprang forward, and bursting into tears, threw her arms round my
neck.

“well, ellen, i’m so afraid of you being angry,” she said. “promise not
to be angry, and you shall know the very truth: i hate to hide it.”

we sat down in the window-seat; i assured her i would not scold,
whatever her secret might be, and i guessed it, of course; so she
commenced—

“i’ve been to wuthering heights, ellen, and i’ve never missed going a
day since you fell ill; except thrice before, and twice after you left
your room. i gave michael books and pictures to prepare minny every
evening, and to put her back in the stable: you mustn’t scold _him_
either, mind. i was at the heights by half-past six, and generally
stayed till half-past eight, and then galloped home. it was not to
amuse myself that i went: i was often wretched all the time. now and
then i was happy: once in a week perhaps. at first, i expected there
would be sad work persuading you to let me keep my word to linton: for
i had engaged to call again next day, when we quitted him; but, as you
stayed upstairs on the morrow, i escaped that trouble. while michael
was refastening the lock of the park door in the afternoon, i got
possession of the key, and told him how my cousin wished me to visit
him, because he was sick, and couldn’t come to the grange; and how papa
would object to my going: and then i negotiated with him about the
pony. he is fond of reading, and he thinks of leaving soon to get
married; so he offered, if i would lend him books out of the library,
to do what i wished: but i preferred giving him my own, and that
satisfied him better.

“on my second visit linton seemed in lively spirits; and zillah (that
is their housekeeper) made us a clean room and a good fire, and told us
that, as joseph was out at a prayer-meeting and hareton earnshaw was
off with his dogs—robbing our woods of pheasants, as i heard
afterwards—we might do what we liked. she brought me some warm wine and
gingerbread, and appeared exceedingly good-natured; and linton sat in
the arm-chair, and i in the little rocking chair on the hearth-stone,
and we laughed and talked so merrily, and found so much to say: we
planned where we would go, and what we would do in summer. i needn’t
repeat that, because you would call it silly.

“one time, however, we were near quarrelling. he said the pleasantest
manner of spending a hot july day was lying from morning till evening
on a bank of heath in the middle of the moors, with the bees humming
dreamily about among the bloom, and the larks singing high up overhead,
and the blue sky and bright sun shining steadily and cloudlessly. that
was his most perfect idea of heaven’s happiness: mine was rocking in a
rustling green tree, with a west wind blowing, and bright white clouds
flitting rapidly above; and not only larks, but throstles, and
blackbirds, and linnets, and cuckoos pouring out music on every side,
and the moors seen at a distance, broken into cool dusky dells; but
close by great swells of long grass undulating in waves to the breeze;
and woods and sounding water, and the whole world awake and wild with
joy. he wanted all to lie in an ecstasy of peace; i wanted all to
sparkle and dance in a glorious jubilee. i said his heaven would be
only half alive; and he said mine would be drunk: i said i should fall
asleep in his; and he said he could not breathe in mine, and began to
grow very snappish. at last, we agreed to try both, as soon as the
right weather came; and then we kissed each other and were friends.

“after sitting still an hour, i looked at the great room with its
smooth uncarpeted floor, and thought how nice it would be to play in,
if we removed the table; and i asked linton to call zillah in to help
us, and we’d have a game at blindman’s-buff; she should try to catch
us: you used to, you know, ellen. he wouldn’t: there was no pleasure in
it, he said; but he consented to play at ball with me. we found two in
a cupboard, among a heap of old toys, tops, and hoops, and battledores
and shuttlecocks. one was marked c., and the other h.; i wished to have
the c., because that stood for catherine, and the h. might be for
heathcliff, his name; but the bran came out of h., and linton didn’t
like it. i beat him constantly; and he got cross again, and coughed,
and returned to his chair. that night, though, he easily recovered his
good humour: he was charmed with two or three pretty songs—_your_
songs, ellen; and when i was obliged to go, he begged and entreated me
to come the following evening; and i promised. minny and i went flying
home as light as air; and i dreamt of wuthering heights and my sweet,
darling cousin, till morning.

“on the morrow i was sad; partly because you were poorly, and partly
that i wished my father knew, and approved of my excursions: but it was
beautiful moonlight after tea; and, as i rode on, the gloom cleared. i
shall have another happy evening, i thought to myself; and what
delights me more, my pretty linton will. i trotted up their garden, and
was turning round to the back, when that fellow earnshaw met me, took
my bridle, and bid me go in by the front entrance. he patted minny’s
neck, and said she was a bonny beast, and appeared as if he wanted me
to speak to him. i only told him to leave my horse alone, or else it
would kick him. he answered in his vulgar accent, ‘it wouldn’t do mitch
hurt if it did;’ and surveyed its legs with a smile. i was half
inclined to make it try; however, he moved off to open the door, and,
as he raised the latch, he looked up to the inscription above, and
said, with a stupid mixture of awkwardness and elation: ‘miss
catherine! i can read yon, now.’

“‘wonderful,’ i exclaimed. ‘pray let us hear you—you _are_ grown
clever!’

“he spelt, and drawled over by syllables, the name—‘hareton earnshaw.’

“‘and the figures?’ i cried, encouragingly, perceiving that he came to
a dead halt.

“‘i cannot tell them yet,’ he answered.

“‘oh, you dunce!’ i said, laughing heartily at his failure.

“the fool stared, with a grin hovering about his lips, and a scowl
gathering over his eyes, as if uncertain whether he might not join in
my mirth: whether it were not pleasant familiarity, or what it really
was, contempt. i settled his doubts, by suddenly retrieving my gravity
and desiring him to walk away, for i came to see linton, not him. he
reddened—i saw that by the moonlight—dropped his hand from the latch,
and skulked off, a picture of mortified vanity. he imagined himself to
be as accomplished as linton, i suppose, because he could spell his own
name; and was marvellously discomfited that i didn’t think the same.”

“stop, miss catherine, dear!” i interrupted. “i shall not scold, but i
don’t like your conduct there. if you had remembered that hareton was
your cousin as much as master heathcliff, you would have felt how
improper it was to behave in that way. at least, it was praiseworthy
ambition for him to desire to be as accomplished as linton; and
probably he did not learn merely to show off: you had made him ashamed
of his ignorance before, i have no doubt; and he wished to remedy it
and please you. to sneer at his imperfect attempt was very bad
breeding. had _you_ been brought up in his circumstances, would you be
less rude? he was as quick and as intelligent a child as ever you were;
and i’m hurt that he should be despised now, because that base
heathcliff has treated him so unjustly.”

“well, ellen, you won’t cry about it, will you?” she exclaimed,
surprised at my earnestness. “but wait, and you shall hear if he conned
his a b c to please me; and if it were worth while being civil to the
brute. i entered; linton was lying on the settle, and half got up to
welcome me.

“‘i’m ill to-night, catherine, love,’ he said; ‘and you must have all
the talk, and let me listen. come, and sit by me. i was sure you
wouldn’t break your word, and i’ll make you promise again, before you
go.’

“i knew now that i mustn’t tease him, as he was ill; and i spoke softly
and put no questions, and avoided irritating him in any way. i had
brought some of my nicest books for him: he asked me to read a little
of one, and i was about to comply, when earnshaw burst the door open:
having gathered venom with reflection. he advanced direct to us, seized
linton by the arm, and swung him off the seat.

“‘get to thy own room!’ he said, in a voice almost inarticulate with
passion; and his face looked swelled and furious. ‘take her there if
she comes to see thee: thou shalln’t keep me out of this. begone wi’ ye
both!’

“he swore at us, and left linton no time to answer, nearly throwing him
into the kitchen; and he clenched his fist as i followed, seemingly
longing to knock me down. i was afraid for a moment, and i let one
volume fall; he kicked it after me, and shut us out. i heard a
malignant, crackly laugh by the fire, and turning, beheld that odious
joseph standing rubbing his bony hands, and quivering.

“‘i wer sure he’d sarve ye out! he’s a grand lad! he’s getten t’ raight
sperrit in him! _he_ knaws—ay, he knaws, as weel as i do, who sud be t’
maister yonder—ech, ech, ech! he made ye skift properly! ech, ech,
ech!’

“‘where must we go?’ i asked of my cousin, disregarding the old
wretch’s mockery.

“linton was white and trembling. he was not pretty then, ellen: oh, no!
he looked frightful; for his thin face and large eyes were wrought into
an expression of frantic, powerless fury. he grasped the handle of the
door, and shook it: it was fastened inside.

“‘if you don’t let me in, i’ll kill you!—if you don’t let me in, i’ll
kill you!’ he rather shrieked than said. ‘devil! devil!—i’ll kill
you—i’ll kill you!’

“joseph uttered his croaking laugh again.

“‘thear, that’s t’ father!’ he cried. ‘that’s father! we’ve allas
summut o’ either side in us. niver heed, hareton, lad—dunnut be
’feard—he cannot get at thee!’

“i took hold of linton’s hands, and tried to pull him away; but he
shrieked so shockingly that i dared not proceed. at last his cries were
choked by a dreadful fit of coughing; blood gushed from his mouth, and
he fell on the ground. i ran into the yard, sick with terror; and
called for zillah, as loud as i could. she soon heard me: she was
milking the cows in a shed behind the barn, and hurrying from her work,
she inquired what there was to do? i hadn’t breath to explain; dragging
her in, i looked about for linton. earnshaw had come out to examine the
mischief he had caused, and he was then conveying the poor thing
upstairs. zillah and i ascended after him; but he stopped me at the top
of the steps, and said i shouldn’t go in: i must go home. i exclaimed
that he had killed linton, and i _would_ enter. joseph locked the door,
and declared i should do ‘no sich stuff,’ and asked me whether i were
‘bahn to be as mad as him.’ i stood crying till the housekeeper
reappeared. she affirmed he would be better in a bit, but he couldn’t
do with that shrieking and din; and she took me, and nearly carried me
into the house.

“ellen, i was ready to tear my hair off my head! i sobbed and wept so
that my eyes were almost blind; and the ruffian you have such sympathy
with stood opposite: presuming every now and then to bid me ‘wisht,’
and denying that it was his fault; and, finally, frightened by my
assertions that i would tell papa, and that he should be put in prison
and hanged, he commenced blubbering himself, and hurried out to hide
his cowardly agitation. still, i was not rid of him: when at length
they compelled me to depart, and i had got some hundred yards off the
premises, he suddenly issued from the shadow of the road-side, and
checked minny and took hold of me.

“‘miss catherine, i’m ill grieved,’ he began, ‘but it’s rayther too
bad—’

“i gave him a cut with my whip, thinking perhaps he would murder me. he
let go, thundering one of his horrid curses, and i galloped home more
than half out of my senses.

“i didn’t bid you good-night that evening, and i didn’t go to wuthering
heights the next: i wished to go exceedingly; but i was strangely
excited, and dreaded to hear that linton was dead, sometimes; and
sometimes shuddered at the thought of encountering hareton. on the
third day i took courage: at least, i couldn’t bear longer suspense,
and stole off once more. i went at five o’clock, and walked; fancying i
might manage to creep into the house, and up to linton’s room,
unobserved. however, the dogs gave notice of my approach. zillah
received me, and saying ‘the lad was mending nicely,’ showed me into a
small, tidy, carpeted apartment, where, to my inexpressible joy, i
beheld linton laid on a little sofa, reading one of my books. but he
would neither speak to me nor look at me, through a whole hour, ellen:
he has such an unhappy temper. and what quite confounded me, when he
did open his mouth, it was to utter the falsehood that i had occasioned
the uproar, and hareton was not to blame! unable to reply, except
passionately, i got up and walked from the room. he sent after me a
faint ‘catherine!’ he did not reckon on being answered so: but i
wouldn’t turn back; and the morrow was the second day on which i stayed
at home, nearly determined to visit him no more. but it was so
miserable going to bed and getting up, and never hearing anything about
him, that my resolution melted into air before it was properly formed.
it _had_ appeared wrong to take the journey once; now it seemed wrong
to refrain. michael came to ask if he must saddle minny; i said ‘yes,’
and considered myself doing a duty as she bore me over the hills. i was
forced to pass the front windows to get to the court: it was no use
trying to conceal my presence.

“‘young master is in the house,’ said zillah, as she saw me making for
the parlour. i went in; earnshaw was there also, but he quitted the
room directly. linton sat in the great arm-chair half asleep; walking
up to the fire, i began in a serious tone, partly meaning it to be
true—

“‘as you don’t like me, linton, and as you think i come on purpose to
hurt you, and pretend that i do so every time, this is our last
meeting: let us say good-bye; and tell mr. heathcliff that you have no
wish to see me, and that he mustn’t invent any more falsehoods on the
subject.’

“‘sit down and take your hat off, catherine,’ he answered. ‘you are so
much happier than i am, you ought to be better. papa talks enough of my
defects, and shows enough scorn of me, to make it natural i should
doubt myself. i doubt whether i am not altogether as worthless as he
calls me, frequently; and then i feel so cross and bitter, i hate
everybody! i _am_ worthless, and bad in temper, and bad in spirit,
almost always; and, if you choose, you _may_ say good-bye: you’ll get
rid of an annoyance. only, catherine, do me this justice: believe that
if i might be as sweet, and as kind, and as good as you are, i would
be; as willingly, and more so, than as happy and as healthy. and
believe that your kindness has made me love you deeper than if i
deserved your love: and though i couldn’t, and cannot help showing my
nature to you, i regret it and repent it; and shall regret and repent
it till i die!’

“i felt he spoke the truth; and i felt i must forgive him: and, though
we should quarrel the next moment, i must forgive him again. we were
reconciled; but we cried, both of us, the whole time i stayed: not
entirely for sorrow; yet i _was_ sorry linton had that distorted
nature. he’ll never let his friends be at ease, and he’ll never be at
ease himself! i have always gone to his little parlour, since that
night; because his father returned the day after.

“about three times, i think, we have been merry and hopeful, as we were
the first evening; the rest of my visits were dreary and troubled: now
with his selfishness and spite, and now with his sufferings: but i’ve
learned to endure the former with nearly as little resentment as the
latter. mr. heathcliff purposely avoids me: i have hardly seen him at
all. last sunday, indeed, coming earlier than usual, i heard him
abusing poor linton cruelly for his conduct of the night before. i
can’t tell how he knew of it, unless he listened. linton had certainly
behaved provokingly: however, it was the business of nobody but me, and
i interrupted mr. heathcliff’s lecture by entering and telling him so.
he burst into a laugh, and went away, saying he was glad i took that
view of the matter. since then, i’ve told linton he must whisper his
bitter things. now, ellen, you have heard all. i can’t be prevented
from going to wuthering heights, except by inflicting misery on two
people; whereas, if you’ll only not tell papa, my going need disturb
the tranquillity of none. you’ll not tell, will you? it will be very
heartless, if you do.”

“i’ll make up my mind on that point by to-morrow, miss catherine,” i
replied. “it requires some study; and so i’ll leave you to your rest,
and go think it over.”

i thought it over aloud, in my master’s presence; walking straight from
her room to his, and relating the whole story: with the exception of
her conversations with her cousin, and any mention of hareton. mr.
linton was alarmed and distressed, more than he would acknowledge to
me. in the morning, catherine learnt my betrayal of her confidence, and
she learnt also that her secret visits were to end. in vain she wept
and writhed against the interdict, and implored her father to have pity
on linton: all she got to comfort her was a promise that he would write
and give him leave to come to the grange when he pleased; but
explaining that he must no longer expect to see catherine at wuthering
heights. perhaps, had he been aware of his nephew’s disposition and
state of health, he would have seen fit to withhold even that slight
consolation.




chapter xxv


“these things happened last winter, sir,” said mrs. dean; “hardly more
than a year ago. last winter, i did not think, at another twelve
months’ end, i should be amusing a stranger to the family with relating
them! yet, who knows how long you’ll be a stranger? you’re too young to
rest always contented, living by yourself; and i some way fancy no one
could see catherine linton and not love her. you smile; but why do you
look so lively and interested when i talk about her? and why have you
asked me to hang her picture over your fireplace? and why—?”

“stop, my good friend!” i cried. “it may be very possible that _i_
should love her; but would she love me? i doubt it too much to venture
my tranquillity by running into temptation: and then my home is not
here. i’m of the busy world, and to its arms i must return. go on. was
catherine obedient to her father’s commands?”

“she was,” continued the housekeeper. “her affection for him was still
the chief sentiment in her heart; and he spoke without anger: he spoke
in the deep tenderness of one about to leave his treasure amid perils
and foes, where his remembered words would be the only aid that he
could bequeath to guide her. he said to me, a few days afterwards, ‘i
wish my nephew would write, ellen, or call. tell me, sincerely, what
you think of him: is he changed for the better, or is there a prospect
of improvement, as he grows a man?’

“‘he’s very delicate, sir,’ i replied; ‘and scarcely likely to reach
manhood: but this i can say, he does not resemble his father; and if
miss catherine had the misfortune to marry him, he would not be beyond
her control: unless she were extremely and foolishly indulgent.
however, master, you’ll have plenty of time to get acquainted with him
and see whether he would suit her: it wants four years and more to his
being of age.’”

edgar sighed; and, walking to the window, looked out towards gimmerton
kirk. it was a misty afternoon, but the february sun shone dimly, and
we could just distinguish the two fir-trees in the yard, and the
sparely-scattered gravestones.

“i’ve prayed often,” he half soliloquised, “for the approach of what is
coming; and now i begin to shrink, and fear it. i thought the memory of
the hour i came down that glen a bridegroom would be less sweet than
the anticipation that i was soon, in a few months, or, possibly, weeks,
to be carried up, and laid in its lonely hollow! ellen, i’ve been very
happy with my little cathy: through winter nights and summer days she
was a living hope at my side. but i’ve been as happy musing by myself
among those stones, under that old church: lying, through the long june
evenings, on the green mound of her mother’s grave, and
wishing—yearning for the time when i might lie beneath it. what can i
do for cathy? how must i quit her? i’d not care one moment for linton
being heathcliff’s son; nor for his taking her from me, if he could
console her for my loss. i’d not care that heathcliff gained his ends,
and triumphed in robbing me of my last blessing! but should linton be
unworthy—only a feeble tool to his father—i cannot abandon her to him!
and, hard though it be to crush her buoyant spirit, i must persevere in
making her sad while i live, and leaving her solitary when i die.
darling! i’d rather resign her to god, and lay her in the earth before
me.”

“resign her to god as it is, sir,” i answered, “and if we should lose
you—which may he forbid—under his providence, i’ll stand her friend and
counsellor to the last. miss catherine is a good girl: i don’t fear
that she will go wilfully wrong; and people who do their duty are
always finally rewarded.”

spring advanced; yet my master gathered no real strength, though he
resumed his walks in the grounds with his daughter. to her
inexperienced notions, this itself was a sign of convalescence; and
then his cheek was often flushed, and his eyes were bright; she felt
sure of his recovering. on her seventeenth birthday, he did not visit
the churchyard: it was raining, and i observed—

“you’ll surely not go out to-night, sir?”

he answered,—“no, i’ll defer it this year a little longer.”

he wrote again to linton, expressing his great desire to see him; and,
had the invalid been presentable, i’ve no doubt his father would have
permitted him to come. as it was, being instructed, he returned an
answer, intimating that mr. heathcliff objected to his calling at the
grange; but his uncle’s kind remembrance delighted him, and he hoped to
meet him sometimes in his rambles, and personally to petition that his
cousin and he might not remain long so utterly divided.

that part of his letter was simple, and probably his own. heathcliff
knew he could plead eloquently for catherine’s company, then.

“i do not ask,” he said, “that she may visit here; but am i never to
see her, because my father forbids me to go to her home, and you forbid
her to come to mine? do, now and then, ride with her towards the
heights; and let us exchange a few words, in your presence! we have
done nothing to deserve this separation; and you are not angry with me:
you have no reason to dislike me, you allow, yourself. dear uncle! send
me a kind note to-morrow, and leave to join you anywhere you please,
except at thrushcross grange. i believe an interview would convince you
that my father’s character is not mine: he affirms i am more your
nephew than his son; and though i have faults which render me unworthy
of catherine, she has excused them, and for her sake, you should also.
you inquire after my health—it is better; but while i remain cut off
from all hope, and doomed to solitude, or the society of those who
never did and never will like me, how can i be cheerful and well?”

edgar, though he felt for the boy, could not consent to grant his
request; because he could not accompany catherine. he said, in summer,
perhaps, they might meet: meantime, he wished him to continue writing
at intervals, and engaged to give him what advice and comfort he was
able by letter; being well aware of his hard position in his family.
linton complied; and had he been unrestrained, would probably have
spoiled all by filling his epistles with complaints and lamentations:
but his father kept a sharp watch over him; and, of course, insisted on
every line that my master sent being shown; so, instead of penning his
peculiar personal sufferings and distresses, the themes constantly
uppermost in his thoughts, he harped on the cruel obligation of being
held asunder from his friend and love; and gently intimated that mr.
linton must allow an interview soon, or he should fear he was purposely
deceiving him with empty promises.

cathy was a powerful ally at home; and between them they at length
persuaded my master to acquiesce in their having a ride or a walk
together about once a week, under my guardianship, and on the moors
nearest the grange: for june found him still declining. though he had
set aside yearly a portion of his income for my young lady’s fortune,
he had a natural desire that she might retain—or at least return in a
short time to—the house of her ancestors; and he considered her only
prospect of doing that was by a union with his heir; he had no idea
that the latter was failing almost as fast as himself; nor had any one,
i believe: no doctor visited the heights, and no one saw master
heathcliff to make report of his condition among us. i, for my part,
began to fancy my forebodings were false, and that he must be actually
rallying, when he mentioned riding and walking on the moors, and seemed
so earnest in pursuing his object. i could not picture a father
treating a dying child as tyrannically and wickedly as i afterwards
learned heathcliff had treated him, to compel this apparent eagerness:
his efforts redoubling the more imminently his avaricious and unfeeling
plans were threatened with defeat by death.




chapter xxvi


summer was already past its prime, when edgar reluctantly yielded his
assent to their entreaties, and catherine and i set out on our first
ride to join her cousin. it was a close, sultry day: devoid of
sunshine, but with a sky too dappled and hazy to threaten rain: and our
place of meeting had been fixed at the guide-stone, by the cross-roads.
on arriving there, however, a little herd-boy, despatched as a
messenger, told us that,—“maister linton wer just o’ this side th’
heights: and he’d be mitch obleeged to us to gang on a bit further.”

“then master linton has forgot the first injunction of his uncle,” i
observed: “he bid us keep on the grange land, and here we are off at
once.”

“well, we’ll turn our horses’ heads round when we reach him,” answered
my companion; “our excursion shall lie towards home.”

but when we reached him, and that was scarcely a quarter of a mile from
his own door, we found he had no horse; and we were forced to dismount,
and leave ours to graze. he lay on the heath, awaiting our approach,
and did not rise till we came within a few yards. then he walked so
feebly, and looked so pale, that i immediately exclaimed,—“why, master
heathcliff, you are not fit for enjoying a ramble this morning. how ill
you do look!”

catherine surveyed him with grief and astonishment: she changed the
ejaculation of joy on her lips to one of alarm; and the congratulation
on their long-postponed meeting to an anxious inquiry, whether he were
worse than usual?

“no—better—better!” he panted, trembling, and retaining her hand as if
he needed its support, while his large blue eyes wandered timidly over
her; the hollowness round them transforming to haggard wildness the
languid expression they once possessed.

“but you have been worse,” persisted his cousin; “worse than when i saw
you last; you are thinner, and—”

“i’m tired,” he interrupted, hurriedly. “it is too hot for walking, let
us rest here. and, in the morning, i often feel sick—papa says i grow
so fast.”

badly satisfied, cathy sat down, and he reclined beside her.

“this is something like your paradise,” said she, making an effort at
cheerfulness. “you recollect the two days we agreed to spend in the
place and way each thought pleasantest? this is nearly yours, only
there are clouds; but then they are so soft and mellow: it is nicer
than sunshine. next week, if you can, we’ll ride down to the grange
park, and try mine.”

linton did not appear to remember what she talked of; and he had
evidently great difficulty in sustaining any kind of conversation. his
lack of interest in the subjects she started, and his equal incapacity
to contribute to her entertainment, were so obvious that she could not
conceal her disappointment. an indefinite alteration had come over his
whole person and manner. the pettishness that might be caressed into
fondness, had yielded to a listless apathy; there was less of the
peevish temper of a child which frets and teases on purpose to be
soothed, and more of the self-absorbed moroseness of a confirmed
invalid, repelling consolation, and ready to regard the good-humoured
mirth of others as an insult. catherine perceived, as well as i did,
that he held it rather a punishment, than a gratification, to endure
our company; and she made no scruple of proposing, presently, to
depart. that proposal, unexpectedly, roused linton from his lethargy,
and threw him into a strange state of agitation. he glanced fearfully
towards the heights, begging she would remain another half-hour, at
least.

“but i think,” said cathy, “you’d be more comfortable at home than
sitting here; and i cannot amuse you to-day, i see, by my tales, and
songs, and chatter: you have grown wiser than i, in these six months;
you have little taste for my diversions now: or else, if i could amuse
you, i’d willingly stay.”

“stay to rest yourself,” he replied. “and, catherine, don’t think or
say that i’m _very_ unwell: it is the heavy weather and heat that make
me dull; and i walked about, before you came, a great deal for me. tell
uncle i’m in tolerable health, will you?”

“i’ll tell him that _you_ say so, linton. i couldn’t affirm that you
are,” observed my young lady, wondering at his pertinacious assertion
of what was evidently an untruth.

“and be here again next thursday,” continued he, shunning her puzzled
gaze. “and give him my thanks for permitting you to come—my best
thanks, catherine. and—and, if you _did_ meet my father, and he asked
you about me, don’t lead him to suppose that i’ve been extremely silent
and stupid: don’t look sad and downcast, as you _are_ doing—he’ll be
angry.”

“i care nothing for his anger,” exclaimed cathy, imagining she would be
its object.

“but i do,” said her cousin, shuddering. “_don’t_ provoke him against
me, catherine, for he is very hard.”

“is he severe to you, master heathcliff?” i inquired. “has he grown
weary of indulgence, and passed from passive to active hatred?”

linton looked at me, but did not answer; and, after keeping her seat by
his side another ten minutes, during which his head fell drowsily on
his breast, and he uttered nothing except suppressed moans of
exhaustion or pain, cathy began to seek solace in looking for
bilberries, and sharing the produce of her researches with me: she did
not offer them to him, for she saw further notice would only weary and
annoy.

“is it half-an-hour now, ellen?” she whispered in my ear, at last. “i
can’t tell why we should stay. he’s asleep, and papa will be wanting us
back.”

“well, we must not leave him asleep,” i answered; “wait till he wakes,
and be patient. you were mighty eager to set off, but your longing to
see poor linton has soon evaporated!”

“why did _he_ wish to see me?” returned catherine. “in his crossest
humours, formerly, i liked him better than i do in his present curious
mood. it’s just as if it were a task he was compelled to perform—this
interview—for fear his father should scold him. but i’m hardly going to
come to give mr. heathcliff pleasure; whatever reason he may have for
ordering linton to undergo this penance. and, though i’m glad he’s
better in health, i’m sorry he’s so much less pleasant, and so much
less affectionate to me.”

“you think _he is_ better in health, then?” i said.

“yes,” she answered; “because he always made such a great deal of his
sufferings, you know. he is not tolerably well, as he told me to tell
papa; but he’s better, very likely.”

“there you differ with me, miss cathy,” i remarked; “i should
conjecture him to be far worse.”

linton here started from his slumber in bewildered terror, and asked if
any one had called his name.

“no,” said catherine; “unless in dreams. i cannot conceive how you
manage to doze out of doors, in the morning.”

“i thought i heard my father,” he gasped, glancing up to the frowning
nab above us. “you are sure nobody spoke?”

“quite sure,” replied his cousin. “only ellen and i were disputing
concerning your health. are you truly stronger, linton, than when we
separated in winter? if you be, i’m certain one thing is not
stronger—your regard for me: speak,—are you?”

the tears gushed from linton’s eyes as he answered, “yes, yes, i am!”
and, still under the spell of the imaginary voice, his gaze wandered up
and down to detect its owner.

cathy rose. “for to-day we must part,” she said. “and i won’t conceal
that i have been sadly disappointed with our meeting; though i’ll
mention it to nobody but you: not that i stand in awe of mr.
heathcliff.”

“hush,” murmured linton; “for god’s sake, hush! he’s coming.” and he
clung to catherine’s arm, striving to detain her; but at that
announcement she hastily disengaged herself, and whistled to minny, who
obeyed her like a dog.

“i’ll be here next thursday,” she cried, springing to the saddle.
“good-bye. quick, ellen!”

and so we left him, scarcely conscious of our departure, so absorbed
was he in anticipating his father’s approach.

before we reached home, catherine’s displeasure softened into a
perplexed sensation of pity and regret, largely blended with vague,
uneasy doubts about linton’s actual circumstances, physical and social:
in which i partook, though i counselled her not to say much; for a
second journey would make us better judges. my master requested an
account of our ongoings. his nephew’s offering of thanks was duly
delivered, miss cathy gently touching on the rest: i also threw little
light on his inquiries, for i hardly knew what to hide and what to
reveal.




chapter xxvii


seven days glided away, every one marking its course by the henceforth
rapid alteration of edgar linton’s state. the havoc that months had
previously wrought was now emulated by the inroads of hours. catherine
we would fain have deluded yet; but her own quick spirit refused to
delude her: it divined in secret, and brooded on the dreadful
probability, gradually ripening into certainty. she had not the heart
to mention her ride, when thursday came round; i mentioned it for her,
and obtained permission to order her out of doors: for the library,
where her father stopped a short time daily—the brief period he could
bear to sit up—and his chamber, had become her whole world. she grudged
each moment that did not find her bending over his pillow, or seated by
his side. her countenance grew wan with watching and sorrow, and my
master gladly dismissed her to what he flattered himself would be a
happy change of scene and society; drawing comfort from the hope that
she would not now be left entirely alone after his death.

he had a fixed idea, i guessed by several observations he let fall,
that, as his nephew resembled him in person, he would resemble him in
mind; for linton’s letters bore few or no indications of his defective
character. and i, through pardonable weakness, refrained from
correcting the error; asking myself what good there would be in
disturbing his last moments with information that he had neither power
nor opportunity to turn to account.

we deferred our excursion till the afternoon; a golden afternoon of
august: every breath from the hills so full of life, that it seemed
whoever respired it, though dying, might revive. catherine’s face was
just like the landscape—shadows and sunshine flitting over it in rapid
succession; but the shadows rested longer, and the sunshine was more
transient; and her poor little heart reproached itself for even that
passing forgetfulness of its cares.

we discerned linton watching at the same spot he had selected before.
my young mistress alighted, and told me that, as she was resolved to
stay a very little while, i had better hold the pony and remain on
horseback; but i dissented: i wouldn’t risk losing sight of the charge
committed to me a minute; so we climbed the slope of heath together.
master heathcliff received us with greater animation on this occasion:
not the animation of high spirits though, nor yet of joy; it looked
more like fear.

“it is late!” he said, speaking short and with difficulty. “is not your
father very ill? i thought you wouldn’t come.”

“_why_ won’t you be candid?” cried catherine, swallowing her greeting.
“why cannot you say at once you don’t want me? it is strange, linton,
that for the second time you have brought me here on purpose,
apparently to distress us both, and for no reason besides!”

linton shivered, and glanced at her, half supplicating, half ashamed;
but his cousin’s patience was not sufficient to endure this enigmatical
behaviour.

“my father _is_ very ill,” she said; “and why am i called from his
bedside? why didn’t you send to absolve me from my promise, when you
wished i wouldn’t keep it? come! i desire an explanation: playing and
trifling are completely banished out of my mind; and i can’t dance
attendance on your affectations now!”

“my affectations!” he murmured; “what are they? for heaven’s sake,
catherine, don’t look so angry! despise me as much as you please; i am
a worthless, cowardly wretch: i can’t be scorned enough; but i’m too
mean for your anger. hate my father, and spare me for contempt.”

“nonsense!” cried catherine in a passion. “foolish, silly boy! and
there! he trembles, as if i were really going to touch him! you needn’t
bespeak contempt, linton: anybody will have it spontaneously at your
service. get off! i shall return home: it is folly dragging you from
the hearth-stone, and pretending—what do we pretend? let go my frock!
if i pitied you for crying and looking so very frightened, you should
spurn such pity. ellen, tell him how disgraceful this conduct is. rise,
and don’t degrade yourself into an abject reptile—_don’t_!”

with streaming face and an expression of agony, linton had thrown his
nerveless frame along the ground: he seemed convulsed with exquisite
terror.

“oh!” he sobbed, “i cannot bear it! catherine, catherine, i’m a
traitor, too, and i dare not tell you! but leave me, and i shall be
killed! _dear_ catherine, my life is in your hands: and you have said
you loved me, and if you did, it wouldn’t harm you. you’ll not go,
then? kind, sweet, good catherine! and perhaps you _will_ consent—and
he’ll let me die with you!”

my young lady, on witnessing his intense anguish, stooped to raise him.
the old feeling of indulgent tenderness overcame her vexation, and she
grew thoroughly moved and alarmed.

“consent to what?” she asked. “to stay! tell me the meaning of this
strange talk, and i will. you contradict your own words, and distract
me! be calm and frank, and confess at once all that weighs on your
heart. you wouldn’t injure me, linton, would you? you wouldn’t let any
enemy hurt me, if you could prevent it? i’ll believe you are a coward,
for yourself, but not a cowardly betrayer of your best friend.”

“but my father threatened me,” gasped the boy, clasping his attenuated
fingers, “and i dread him—i dread him! i _dare_ not tell!”

“oh, well!” said catherine, with scornful compassion, “keep your
secret: _i’m_ no coward. save yourself: i’m not afraid!”

her magnanimity provoked his tears: he wept wildly, kissing her
supporting hands, and yet could not summon courage to speak out. i was
cogitating what the mystery might be, and determined catherine should
never suffer to benefit him or any one else, by my good will; when,
hearing a rustle among the ling, i looked up and saw mr. heathcliff
almost close upon us, descending the heights. he didn’t cast a glance
towards my companions, though they were sufficiently near for linton’s
sobs to be audible; but hailing me in the almost hearty tone he assumed
to none besides, and the sincerity of which i couldn’t avoid doubting,
he said—

“it is something to see you so near to my house, nelly. how are you at
the grange? let us hear. the rumour goes,” he added, in a lower tone,
“that edgar linton is on his death-bed: perhaps they exaggerate his
illness?”

“no; my master is dying,” i replied: “it is true enough. a sad thing it
will be for us all, but a blessing for him!”

“how long will he last, do you think?” he asked.

“i don’t know,” i said.

“because,” he continued, looking at the two young people, who were
fixed under his eye—linton appeared as if he could not venture to stir
or raise his head, and catherine could not move, on his
account—“because that lad yonder seems determined to beat me; and i’d
thank his uncle to be quick, and go before him! hallo! has the whelp
been playing that game long? i _did_ give him some lessons about
snivelling. is he pretty lively with miss linton generally?”

“lively? no—he has shown the greatest distress,” i answered. “to see
him, i should say, that instead of rambling with his sweetheart on the
hills, he ought to be in bed, under the hands of a doctor.”

“he shall be, in a day or two,” muttered heathcliff. “but first—get up,
linton! get up!” he shouted. “don’t grovel on the ground there: up,
this moment!”

linton had sunk prostrate again in another paroxysm of helpless fear,
caused by his father’s glance towards him, i suppose: there was nothing
else to produce such humiliation. he made several efforts to obey, but
his little strength was annihilated for the time, and he fell back
again with a moan. mr. heathcliff advanced, and lifted him to lean
against a ridge of turf.

“now,” said he, with curbed ferocity, “i’m getting angry—and if you
don’t command that paltry spirit of yours—_damn_ you! get up directly!”

“i will, father,” he panted. “only, let me alone, or i shall faint.
i’ve done as you wished, i’m sure. catherine will tell you that i—that
i—have been cheerful. ah! keep by me, catherine; give me your hand.”

“take mine,” said his father; “stand on your feet. there now—she’ll
lend you her arm: that’s right, look at _her_. you would imagine i was
the devil himself, miss linton, to excite such horror. be so kind as to
walk home with him, will you? he shudders if i touch him.”

“linton dear!” whispered catherine, “i can’t go to wuthering heights:
papa has forbidden me. he’ll not harm you: why are you so afraid?”

“i can never re-enter that house,” he answered. “i’m _not_ to re-enter
it without you!”

“stop!” cried his father. “we’ll respect catherine’s filial scruples.
nelly, take him in, and i’ll follow your advice concerning the doctor,
without delay.”

“you’ll do well,” replied i. “but i must remain with my mistress: to
mind your son is not my business.”

“you are very stiff,” said heathcliff, “i know that: but you’ll force
me to pinch the baby and make it scream before it moves your charity.
come, then, my hero. are you willing to return, escorted by me?”

he approached once more, and made as if he would seize the fragile
being; but, shrinking back, linton clung to his cousin, and implored
her to accompany him, with a frantic importunity that admitted no
denial. however i disapproved, i couldn’t hinder her: indeed, how could
she have refused him herself? what was filling him with dread we had no
means of discerning; but there he was, powerless under its gripe, and
any addition seemed capable of shocking him into idiocy. we reached the
threshold; catherine walked in, and i stood waiting till she had
conducted the invalid to a chair, expecting her out immediately; when
mr. heathcliff, pushing me forward, exclaimed—“my house is not stricken
with the plague, nelly; and i have a mind to be hospitable to-day: sit
down, and allow me to shut the door.”

he shut and locked it also. i started.

“you shall have tea before you go home,” he added. “i am by myself.
hareton is gone with some cattle to the lees, and zillah and joseph are
off on a journey of pleasure; and, though i’m used to being alone, i’d
rather have some interesting company, if i can get it. miss linton,
take your seat by _him_. i give you what i have: the present is hardly
worth accepting; but i have nothing else to offer. it is linton, i
mean. how she does stare! it’s odd what a savage feeling i have to
anything that seems afraid of me! had i been born where laws are less
strict and tastes less dainty, i should treat myself to a slow
vivisection of those two, as an evening’s amusement.”

he drew in his breath, struck the table, and swore to himself, “by
hell! i hate them.”

“i am not afraid of you!” exclaimed catherine, who could not hear the
latter part of his speech. she stepped close up; her black eyes
flashing with passion and resolution. “give me that key: i will have
it!” she said. “i wouldn’t eat or drink here, if i were starving.”

heathcliff had the key in his hand that remained on the table. he
looked up, seized with a sort of surprise at her boldness; or,
possibly, reminded, by her voice and glance, of the person from whom
she inherited it. she snatched at the instrument, and half succeeded in
getting it out of his loosened fingers: but her action recalled him to
the present; he recovered it speedily.

“now, catherine linton,” he said, “stand off, or i shall knock you
down; and that will make mrs. dean mad.”

regardless of this warning, she captured his closed hand and its
contents again. “we _will_ go!” she repeated, exerting her utmost
efforts to cause the iron muscles to relax; and finding that her nails
made no impression, she applied her teeth pretty sharply. heathcliff
glanced at me a glance that kept me from interfering a moment.
catherine was too intent on his fingers to notice his face. he opened
them suddenly, and resigned the object of dispute; but, ere she had
well secured it, he seized her with the liberated hand, and, pulling
her on his knee, administered with the other a shower of terrific slaps
on both sides of the head, each sufficient to have fulfilled his
threat, had she been able to fall.

at this diabolical violence i rushed on him furiously. “you villain!” i
began to cry, “you villain!” a touch on the chest silenced me: i am
stout, and soon put out of breath; and, what with that and the rage, i
staggered dizzily back, and felt ready to suffocate, or to burst a
blood-vessel. the scene was over in two minutes; catherine, released,
put her two hands to her temples, and looked just as if she were not
sure whether her ears were off or on. she trembled like a reed, poor
thing, and leant against the table perfectly bewildered.

“i know how to chastise children, you see,” said the scoundrel, grimly,
as he stooped to repossess himself of the key, which had dropped to the
floor. “go to linton now, as i told you; and cry at your ease! i shall
be your father, to-morrow—all the father you’ll have in a few days—and
you shall have plenty of that. you can bear plenty; you’re no weakling:
you shall have a daily taste, if i catch such a devil of a temper in
your eyes again!”

cathy ran to me instead of linton, and knelt down and put her burning
cheek on my lap, weeping aloud. her cousin had shrunk into a corner of
the settle, as quiet as a mouse, congratulating himself, i dare say,
that the correction had alighted on another than him. mr. heathcliff,
perceiving us all confounded, rose, and expeditiously made the tea
himself. the cups and saucers were laid ready. he poured it out, and
handed me a cup.

“wash away your spleen,” he said. “and help your own naughty pet and
mine. it is not poisoned, though i prepared it. i’m going out to seek
your horses.”

our first thought, on his departure, was to force an exit somewhere. we
tried the kitchen door, but that was fastened outside: we looked at the
windows—they were too narrow for even cathy’s little figure.

“master linton,” i cried, seeing we were regularly imprisoned, “you
know what your diabolical father is after, and you shall tell us, or
i’ll box your ears, as he has done your cousin’s.”

“yes, linton, you must tell,” said catherine. “it was for your sake i
came; and it will be wickedly ungrateful if you refuse.”

“give me some tea, i’m thirsty, and then i’ll tell you,” he answered.
“mrs. dean, go away. i don’t like you standing over me. now, catherine,
you are letting your tears fall into my cup. i won’t drink that. give
me another.”

catherine pushed another to him, and wiped her face. i felt disgusted
at the little wretch’s composure, since he was no longer in terror for
himself. the anguish he had exhibited on the moor subsided as soon as
ever he entered wuthering heights; so i guessed he had been menaced
with an awful visitation of wrath if he failed in decoying us there;
and, that accomplished, he had no further immediate fears.

“papa wants us to be married,” he continued, after sipping some of the
liquid. “and he knows your papa wouldn’t let us marry now; and he’s
afraid of my dying if we wait; so we are to be married in the morning,
and you are to stay here all night; and, if you do as he wishes, you
shall return home next day, and take me with you.”

“take you with her, pitiful changeling!” i exclaimed. “_you_ marry?
why, the man is mad! or he thinks us fools, every one. and do you
imagine that beautiful young lady, that healthy, hearty girl, will tie
herself to a little perishing monkey like you? are you cherishing the
notion that _anybody_, let alone miss catherine linton, would have you
for a husband? you want whipping for bringing us in here at all, with
your dastardly puling tricks: and—don’t look so silly, now! i’ve a very
good mind to shake you severely, for your contemptible treachery, and
your imbecile conceit.”

i did give him a slight shaking; but it brought on the cough, and he
took to his ordinary resource of moaning and weeping, and catherine
rebuked me.

“stay all night? no,” she said, looking slowly round. “ellen, i’ll burn
that door down but i’ll get out.”

and she would have commenced the execution of her threat directly, but
linton was up in alarm for his dear self again. he clasped her in his
two feeble arms sobbing:—“won’t you have me, and save me? not let me
come to the grange? oh, darling catherine! you mustn’t go and leave,
after all. you _must_ obey my father—you _must_!”

“i must obey my own,” she replied, “and relieve him from this cruel
suspense. the whole night! what would he think? he’ll be distressed
already. i’ll either break or burn a way out of the house. be quiet!
you’re in no danger; but if you hinder me—linton, i love papa better
than you!”

the mortal terror he felt of mr. heathcliff’s anger restored to the boy
his coward’s eloquence. catherine was near distraught: still, she
persisted that she must go home, and tried entreaty in her turn,
persuading him to subdue his selfish agony. while they were thus
occupied, our jailor re-entered.

“your beasts have trotted off,” he said, “and—now linton! snivelling
again? what has she been doing to you? come, come—have done, and get to
bed. in a month or two, my lad, you’ll be able to pay her back her
present tyrannies with a vigorous hand. you’re pining for pure love,
are you not? nothing else in the world: and she shall have you! there,
to bed! zillah won’t be here to-night; you must undress yourself. hush!
hold your noise! once in your own room, i’ll not come near you: you
needn’t fear. by chance, you’ve managed tolerably. i’ll look to the
rest.”

he spoke these words, holding the door open for his son to pass, and
the latter achieved his exit exactly as a spaniel might which suspected
the person who attended on it of designing a spiteful squeeze. the lock
was re-secured. heathcliff approached the fire, where my mistress and i
stood silent. catherine looked up, and instinctively raised her hand to
her cheek: his neighbourhood revived a painful sensation. anybody else
would have been incapable of regarding the childish act with sternness,
but he scowled on her and muttered—“oh! you are not afraid of me? your
courage is well disguised: you _seem_ damnably afraid!”

“i _am_ afraid now,” she replied, “because, if i stay, papa will be
miserable: and how can i endure making him miserable—when he—when
he—mr. heathcliff, _let_ me go home! i promise to marry linton: papa
would like me to: and i love him. why should you wish to force me to do
what i’ll willingly do of myself?”

“let him dare to force you,” i cried. “there’s law in the land, thank
god! there is; though we be in an out-of-the-way place. i’d inform if
he were my own son: and it’s felony without benefit of clergy!”

“silence!” said the ruffian. “to the devil with your clamour! i don’t
want _you_ to speak. miss linton, i shall enjoy myself remarkably in
thinking your father will be miserable: i shall not sleep for
satisfaction. you could have hit on no surer way of fixing your
residence under my roof for the next twenty-four hours than informing
me that such an event would follow. as to your promise to marry linton,
i’ll take care you shall keep it; for you shall not quit this place
till it is fulfilled.”

“send ellen, then, to let papa know i’m safe!” exclaimed catherine,
weeping bitterly. “or marry me now. poor papa! ellen, he’ll think we’re
lost. what shall we do?”

“not he! he’ll think you are tired of waiting on him, and run off for a
little amusement,” answered heathcliff. “you cannot deny that you
entered my house of your own accord, in contempt of his injunctions to
the contrary. and it is quite natural that you should desire amusement
at your age; and that you would weary of nursing a sick man, and that
man _only_ your father. catherine, his happiest days were over when
your days began. he cursed you, i dare say, for coming into the world
(i did, at least); and it would just do if he cursed you as _he_ went
out of it. i’d join him. i don’t love you! how should i? weep away. as
far as i can see, it will be your chief diversion hereafter; unless
linton make amends for other losses: and your provident parent appears
to fancy he may. his letters of advice and consolation entertained me
vastly. in his last he recommended my jewel to be careful of his; and
kind to her when he got her. careful and kind—that’s paternal. but
linton requires his whole stock of care and kindness for himself.
linton can play the little tyrant well. he’ll undertake to torture any
number of cats, if their teeth be drawn and their claws pared. you’ll
be able to tell his uncle fine tales of his _kindness_, when you get
home again, i assure you.”

“you’re right there!” i said; “explain your son’s character. show his
resemblance to yourself: and then, i hope, miss cathy will think twice
before she takes the cockatrice!”

“i don’t much mind speaking of his amiable qualities now,” he answered;
“because she must either accept him or remain a prisoner, and you along
with her, till your master dies. i can detain you both, quite
concealed, here. if you doubt, encourage her to retract her word, and
you’ll have an opportunity of judging!”

“i’ll not retract my word,” said catherine. “i’ll marry him within this
hour, if i may go to thrushcross grange afterwards. mr. heathcliff,
you’re a cruel man, but you’re not a fiend; and you won’t, from _mere_
malice, destroy irrevocably all my happiness. if papa thought i had
left him on purpose, and if he died before i returned, could i bear to
live? i’ve given over crying: but i’m going to kneel here, at your
knee; and i’ll not get up, and i’ll not take my eyes from your face
till you look back at me! no, don’t turn away! _do_ look! you’ll see
nothing to provoke you. i don’t hate you. i’m not angry that you struck
me. have you never loved _anybody_ in all your life, uncle? _never_?
ah! you must look once. i’m so wretched, you can’t help being sorry and
pitying me.”

“keep your eft’s fingers off; and move, or i’ll kick you!” cried
heathcliff, brutally repulsing her. “i’d rather be hugged by a snake.
how the devil can you dream of fawning on me? i _detest_ you!”

he shrugged his shoulders: shook himself, indeed, as if his flesh crept
with aversion; and thrust back his chair; while i got up, and opened my
mouth, to commence a downright torrent of abuse. but i was rendered
dumb in the middle of the first sentence, by a threat that i should be
shown into a room by myself the very next syllable i uttered. it was
growing dark—we heard a sound of voices at the garden-gate. our host
hurried out instantly: _he_ had his wits about him; _we_ had not. there
was a talk of two or three minutes, and he returned alone.

“i thought it had been your cousin hareton,” i observed to catherine.
“i wish he would arrive! who knows but he might take our part?”

“it was three servants sent to seek you from the grange,” said
heathcliff, overhearing me. “you should have opened a lattice and
called out: but i could swear that chit is glad you didn’t. she’s glad
to be obliged to stay, i’m certain.”

at learning the chance we had missed, we both gave vent to our grief
without control; and he allowed us to wail on till nine o’clock. then
he bid us go upstairs, through the kitchen, to zillah’s chamber; and i
whispered my companion to obey: perhaps we might contrive to get
through the window there, or into a garret, and out by its skylight.
the window, however, was narrow, like those below, and the garret trap
was safe from our attempts; for we were fastened in as before. we
neither of us lay down: catherine took her station by the lattice, and
watched anxiously for morning; a deep sigh being the only answer i
could obtain to my frequent entreaties that she would try to rest. i
seated myself in a chair, and rocked to and fro, passing harsh judgment
on my many derelictions of duty; from which, it struck me then, all the
misfortunes of my employers sprang. it was not the case, in reality, i
am aware; but it was, in my imagination, that dismal night; and i
thought heathcliff himself less guilty than i.

at seven o’clock he came, and inquired if miss linton had risen. she
ran to the door immediately, and answered, “yes.” “here, then,” he
said, opening it, and pulling her out. i rose to follow, but he turned
the lock again. i demanded my release.

“be patient,” he replied; “i’ll send up your breakfast in a while.”

i thumped on the panels, and rattled the latch angrily; and catherine
asked why i was still shut up? he answered, i must try to endure it
another hour, and they went away. i endured it two or three hours; at
length, i heard a footstep: not heathcliff’s.

“i’ve brought you something to eat,” said a voice; “oppen t’ door!”

complying eagerly, i beheld hareton, laden with food enough to last me
all day.

“tak’ it,” he added, thrusting the tray into my hand.

“stay one minute,” i began.

“nay,” cried he, and retired, regardless of any prayers i could pour
forth to detain him.

and there i remained enclosed the whole day, and the whole of the next
night; and another, and another. five nights and four days i remained,
altogether, seeing nobody but hareton once every morning; and he was a
model of a jailor: surly, and dumb, and deaf to every attempt at moving
his sense of justice or compassion.




chapter xxviii


on the fifth morning, or rather afternoon, a different step
approached—lighter and shorter; and, this time, the person entered the
room. it was zillah; donned in her scarlet shawl, with a black silk
bonnet on her head, and a willow-basket swung to her arm.

“eh, dear! mrs. dean!” she exclaimed. “well! there is a talk about you
at gimmerton. i never thought but you were sunk in the blackhorse
marsh, and missy with you, till master told me you’d been found, and
he’d lodged you here! what! and you must have got on an island, sure?
and how long were you in the hole? did master save you, mrs. dean? but
you’re not so thin—you’ve not been so poorly, have you?”

“your master is a true scoundrel!” i replied. “but he shall answer for
it. he needn’t have raised that tale: it shall all be laid bare!”

“what do you mean?” asked zillah. “it’s not his tale: they tell that in
the village—about your being lost in the marsh; and i calls to
earnshaw, when i come in—‘eh, they’s queer things, mr. hareton,
happened since i went off. it’s a sad pity of that likely young lass,
and cant nelly dean.’ he stared. i thought he had not heard aught, so i
told him the rumour. the master listened, and he just smiled to
himself, and said, ‘if they have been in the marsh, they are out now,
zillah. nelly dean is lodged, at this minute, in your room. you can
tell her to flit, when you go up; here is the key. the bog-water got
into her head, and she would have run home quite flighty, but i fixed
her till she came round to her senses. you can bid her go to the grange
at once, if she be able, and carry a message from me, that her young
lady will follow in time to attend the squire’s funeral.’”

“mr. edgar is not dead?” i gasped. “oh! zillah, zillah!”

“no, no; sit you down, my good mistress,” she replied; “you’re right
sickly yet. he’s not dead; doctor kenneth thinks he may last another
day. i met him on the road and asked.”

instead of sitting down, i snatched my outdoor things, and hastened
below, for the way was free. on entering the house, i looked about for
some one to give information of catherine. the place was filled with
sunshine, and the door stood wide open; but nobody seemed at hand. as i
hesitated whether to go off at once, or return and seek my mistress, a
slight cough drew my attention to the hearth. linton lay on the settle,
sole tenant, sucking a stick of sugar-candy, and pursuing my movements
with apathetic eyes. “where is miss catherine?” i demanded sternly,
supposing i could frighten him into giving intelligence, by catching
him thus, alone. he sucked on like an innocent.

“is she gone?” i said.

“no,” he replied; “she’s upstairs: she’s not to go; we won’t let her.”

“you won’t let her, little idiot!” i exclaimed. “direct me to her room
immediately, or i’ll make you sing out sharply.”

“papa would make you sing out, if you attempted to get there,” he
answered. “he says i’m not to be soft with catherine: she’s my wife,
and it’s shameful that she should wish to leave me. he says she hates
me and wants me to die, that she may have my money; but she shan’t have
it: and she shan’t go home! she never shall!—she may cry, and be sick
as much as she pleases!”

he resumed his former occupation, closing his lids, as if he meant to
drop asleep.

“master heathcliff,” i resumed, “have you forgotten all catherine’s
kindness to you last winter, when you affirmed you loved her, and when
she brought you books and sung you songs, and came many a time through
wind and snow to see you? she wept to miss one evening, because you
would be disappointed; and you felt then that she was a hundred times
too good to you: and now you believe the lies your father tells, though
you know he detests you both. and you join him against her. that’s fine
gratitude, is it not?”

the corner of linton’s mouth fell, and he took the sugar-candy from his
lips.

“did she come to wuthering heights because she hated you?” i continued.
“think for yourself! as to your money, she does not even know that you
will have any. and you say she’s sick; and yet you leave her alone, up
there in a strange house! _you_ who have felt what it is to be so
neglected! you could pity your own sufferings; and she pitied them,
too; but you won’t pity hers! i shed tears, master heathcliff, you
see—an elderly woman, and a servant merely—and you, after pretending
such affection, and having reason to worship her almost, store every
tear you have for yourself, and lie there quite at ease. ah! you’re a
heartless, selfish boy!”

“i can’t stay with her,” he answered crossly. “i’ll not stay by myself.
she cries so i can’t bear it. and she won’t give over, though i say
i’ll call my father. i did call him once, and he threatened to strangle
her if she was not quiet; but she began again the instant he left the
room, moaning and grieving all night long, though i screamed for
vexation that i couldn’t sleep.”

“is mr. heathcliff out?” i inquired, perceiving that the wretched
creature had no power to sympathise with his cousin’s mental tortures.

“he’s in the court,” he replied, “talking to doctor kenneth; who says
uncle is dying, truly, at last. i’m glad, for i shall be master of the
grange after him. catherine always spoke of it as _her_ house. it isn’t
hers! it’s mine: papa says everything she has is mine. all her nice
books are mine; she offered to give me them, and her pretty birds, and
her pony minny, if i would get the key of our room, and let her out;
but i told her she had nothing to give, they were all, all mine. and
then she cried, and took a little picture from her neck, and said i
should have that; two pictures in a gold case, on one side her mother,
and on the other uncle, when they were young. that was yesterday—i said
_they_ were mine, too; and tried to get them from her. the spiteful
thing wouldn’t let me: she pushed me off, and hurt me. i shrieked
out—that frightens her—she heard papa coming, and she broke the hinges
and divided the case, and gave me her mother’s portrait; the other she
attempted to hide: but papa asked what was the matter, and i explained
it. he took the one i had away, and ordered her to resign hers to me;
she refused, and he—he struck her down, and wrenched it off the chain,
and crushed it with his foot.”

“and were you pleased to see her struck?” i asked: having my designs in
encouraging his talk.

“i winked,” he answered: “i wink to see my father strike a dog or a
horse, he does it so hard. yet i was glad at first—she deserved
punishing for pushing me: but when papa was gone, she made me come to
the window and showed me her cheek cut on the inside, against her
teeth, and her mouth filling with blood; and then she gathered up the
bits of the picture, and went and sat down with her face to the wall,
and she has never spoken to me since: and i sometimes think she can’t
speak for pain. i don’t like to think so; but she’s a naughty thing for
crying continually; and she looks so pale and wild, i’m afraid of her.”

“and you can get the key if you choose?” i said.

“yes, when i am upstairs,” he answered; “but i can’t walk upstairs
now.”

“in what apartment is it?” i asked.

“oh,” he cried, “i shan’t tell _you_ where it is. it is our secret.
nobody, neither hareton nor zillah, is to know. there! you’ve tired
me—go away, go away!” and he turned his face on to his arm, and shut
his eyes again.

i considered it best to depart without seeing mr. heathcliff, and bring
a rescue for my young lady from the grange. on reaching it, the
astonishment of my fellow-servants to see me, and their joy also, was
intense; and when they heard that their little mistress was safe, two
or three were about to hurry up and shout the news at mr. edgar’s door:
but i bespoke the announcement of it myself. how changed i found him,
even in those few days! he lay an image of sadness and resignation
awaiting his death. very young he looked: though his actual age was
thirty-nine, one would have called him ten years younger, at least. he
thought of catherine; for he murmured her name. i touched his hand, and
spoke.

“catherine is coming, dear master!” i whispered; “she is alive and
well; and will be here, i hope, to-night.”

i trembled at the first effects of this intelligence: he half rose up,
looked eagerly round the apartment, and then sank back in a swoon. as
soon as he recovered, i related our compulsory visit, and detention at
the heights. i said heathcliff forced me to go in: which was not quite
true. i uttered as little as possible against linton; nor did i
describe all his father’s brutal conduct—my intentions being to add no
bitterness, if i could help it, to his already overflowing cup.

he divined that one of his enemy’s purposes was to secure the personal
property, as well as the estate, to his son: or rather himself; yet why
he did not wait till his decease was a puzzle to my master, because
ignorant how nearly he and his nephew would quit the world together.
however, he felt that his will had better be altered: instead of
leaving catherine’s fortune at her own disposal, he determined to put
it in the hands of trustees for her use during life, and for her
children, if she had any, after her. by that means, it could not fall
to mr. heathcliff should linton die.

having received his orders, i despatched a man to fetch the attorney,
and four more, provided with serviceable weapons, to demand my young
lady of her jailor. both parties were delayed very late. the single
servant returned first. he said mr. green, the lawyer, was out when he
arrived at his house, and he had to wait two hours for his re-entrance;
and then mr. green told him he had a little business in the village
that must be done; but he would be at thrushcross grange before
morning. the four men came back unaccompanied also. they brought word
that catherine was ill: too ill to quit her room; and heathcliff would
not suffer them to see her. i scolded the stupid fellows well for
listening to that tale, which i would not carry to my master; resolving
to take a whole bevy up to the heights, at daylight, and storm it
literally, unless the prisoner were quietly surrendered to us. her
father _shall_ see her, i vowed, and vowed again, if that devil be
killed on his own door-stones in trying to prevent it!

happily, i was spared the journey and the trouble. i had gone
downstairs at three o’clock to fetch a jug of water; and was passing
through the hall with it in my hand, when a sharp knock at the front
door made me jump. “oh! it is green,” i said, recollecting myself—“only
green,” and i went on, intending to send somebody else to open it; but
the knock was repeated: not loud, and still importunately. i put the
jug on the banister and hastened to admit him myself. the harvest moon
shone clear outside. it was not the attorney. my own sweet little
mistress sprang on my neck sobbing, “ellen, ellen! is papa alive?”

“yes,” i cried: “yes, my angel, he is, god be thanked, you are safe
with us again!”

she wanted to run, breathless as she was, upstairs to mr. linton’s
room; but i compelled her to sit down on a chair, and made her drink,
and washed her pale face, chafing it into a faint colour with my apron.
then i said i must go first, and tell of her arrival; imploring her to
say, she should be happy with young heathcliff. she stared, but soon
comprehending why i counselled her to utter the falsehood, she assured
me she would not complain.

i couldn’t abide to be present at their meeting. i stood outside the
chamber-door a quarter of an hour, and hardly ventured near the bed,
then. all was composed, however: catherine’s despair was as silent as
her father’s joy. she supported him calmly, in appearance; and he fixed
on her features his raised eyes that seemed dilating with ecstasy.

he died blissfully, mr. lockwood: he died so. kissing her cheek, he
murmured,—“i am going to her; and you, darling child, shall come to
us!” and never stirred or spoke again; but continued that rapt, radiant
gaze, till his pulse imperceptibly stopped and his soul departed. none
could have noticed the exact minute of his death, it was so entirely
without a struggle.

whether catherine had spent her tears, or whether the grief were too
weighty to let them flow, she sat there dry-eyed till the sun rose: she
sat till noon, and would still have remained brooding over that
deathbed, but i insisted on her coming away and taking some repose. it
was well i succeeded in removing her, for at dinner-time appeared the
lawyer, having called at wuthering heights to get his instructions how
to behave. he had sold himself to mr. heathcliff: that was the cause of
his delay in obeying my master’s summons. fortunately, no thought of
worldly affairs crossed the latter’s mind, to disturb him, after his
daughter’s arrival.

mr. green took upon himself to order everything and everybody about the
place. he gave all the servants but me, notice to quit. he would have
carried his delegated authority to the point of insisting that edgar
linton should not be buried beside his wife, but in the chapel, with
his family. there was the will, however, to hinder that, and my loud
protestations against any infringement of its directions. the funeral
was hurried over; catherine, mrs. linton heathcliff now, was suffered
to stay at the grange till her father’s corpse had quitted it.

she told me that her anguish had at last spurred linton to incur the
risk of liberating her. she heard the men i sent disputing at the door,
and she gathered the sense of heathcliff’s answer. it drove her
desperate. linton who had been conveyed up to the little parlour soon
after i left, was terrified into fetching the key before his father
re-ascended. he had the cunning to unlock and re-lock the door, without
shutting it; and when he should have gone to bed, he begged to sleep
with hareton, and his petition was granted for once. catherine stole
out before break of day. she dared not try the doors lest the dogs
should raise an alarm; she visited the empty chambers and examined
their windows; and, luckily, lighting on her mother’s, she got easily
out of its lattice, and on to the ground, by means of the fir-tree
close by. her accomplice suffered for his share in the escape,
notwithstanding his timid contrivances.




chapter xxix


the evening after the funeral, my young lady and i were seated in the
library; now musing mournfully—one of us despairingly—on our loss, now
venturing conjectures as to the gloomy future.

we had just agreed the best destiny which could await catherine would
be a permission to continue resident at the grange; at least during
linton’s life: he being allowed to join her there, and i to remain as
housekeeper. that seemed rather too favourable an arrangement to be
hoped for; and yet i did hope, and began to cheer up under the prospect
of retaining my home and my employment, and, above all, my beloved
young mistress; when a servant—one of the discarded ones, not yet
departed—rushed hastily in, and said “that devil heathcliff” was coming
through the court: should he fasten the door in his face?

if we had been mad enough to order that proceeding, we had not time. he
made no ceremony of knocking or announcing his name: he was master, and
availed himself of the master’s privilege to walk straight in, without
saying a word. the sound of our informant’s voice directed him to the
library; he entered and motioning him out, shut the door.

it was the same room into which he had been ushered, as a guest,
eighteen years before: the same moon shone through the window; and the
same autumn landscape lay outside. we had not yet lighted a candle, but
all the apartment was visible, even to the portraits on the wall: the
splendid head of mrs. linton, and the graceful one of her husband.
heathcliff advanced to the hearth. time had little altered his person
either. there was the same man: his dark face rather sallower and more
composed, his frame a stone or two heavier, perhaps, and no other
difference. catherine had risen with an impulse to dash out, when she
saw him.

“stop!” he said, arresting her by the arm. “no more runnings away!
where would you go? i’m come to fetch you home; and i hope you’ll be a
dutiful daughter and not encourage my son to further disobedience. i
was embarrassed how to punish him when i discovered his part in the
business: he’s such a cobweb, a pinch would annihilate him; but you’ll
see by his look that he has received his due! i brought him down one
evening, the day before yesterday, and just set him in a chair, and
never touched him afterwards. i sent hareton out, and we had the room
to ourselves. in two hours, i called joseph to carry him up again; and
since then my presence is as potent on his nerves as a ghost; and i
fancy he sees me often, though i am not near. hareton says he wakes and
shrieks in the night by the hour together, and calls you to protect him
from me; and, whether you like your precious mate, or not, you must
come: he’s your concern now; i yield all my interest in him to you.”

“why not let catherine continue here,” i pleaded, “and send master
linton to her? as you hate them both, you’d not miss them: they _can_
only be a daily plague to your unnatural heart.”

“i’m seeking a tenant for the grange,” he answered; “and i want my
children about me, to be sure. besides, that lass owes me her services
for her bread. i’m not going to nurture her in luxury and idleness
after linton is gone. make haste and get ready, now; and don’t oblige
me to compel you.”

“i shall,” said catherine. “linton is all i have to love in the world,
and though you have done what you could to make him hateful to me, and
me to him, you _cannot_ make us hate each other. and i defy you to hurt
him when i am by, and i defy you to frighten me!”

“you are a boastful champion,” replied heathcliff; “but i don’t like
you well enough to hurt him: you shall get the full benefit of the
torment, as long as it lasts. it is not i who will make him hateful to
you—it is his own sweet spirit. he’s as bitter as gall at your
desertion and its consequences: don’t expect thanks for this noble
devotion. i heard him draw a pleasant picture to zillah of what he
would do if he were as strong as i: the inclination is there, and his
very weakness will sharpen his wits to find a substitute for strength.”

“i know he has a bad nature,” said catherine: “he’s your son. but i’m
glad i’ve a better, to forgive it; and i know he loves me, and for that
reason i love him. mr. heathcliff, _you_ have _nobody_ to love you;
and, however miserable you make us, we shall still have the revenge of
thinking that your cruelty arises from your greater misery. you _are_
miserable, are you not? lonely, like the devil, and envious like him?
_nobody_ loves you—_nobody_ will cry for you when you die! i wouldn’t
be you!”

catherine spoke with a kind of dreary triumph: she seemed to have made
up her mind to enter into the spirit of her future family, and draw
pleasure from the griefs of her enemies.

“you shall be sorry to be yourself presently,” said her father-in-law,
“if you stand there another minute. begone, witch, and get your
things!”

she scornfully withdrew. in her absence i began to beg for zillah’s
place at the heights, offering to resign mine to her; but he would
suffer it on no account. he bid me be silent; and then, for the first
time, allowed himself a glance round the room and a look at the
pictures. having studied mrs. linton’s, he said—“i shall have that
home. not because i need it, but—” he turned abruptly to the fire, and
continued, with what, for lack of a better word, i must call a
smile—“i’ll tell you what i did yesterday! i got the sexton, who was
digging linton’s grave, to remove the earth off her coffin lid, and i
opened it. i thought, once, i would have stayed there: when i saw her
face again—it is hers yet!—he had hard work to stir me; but he said it
would change if the air blew on it, and so i struck one side of the
coffin loose, and covered it up: not linton’s side, damn him! i wish
he’d been soldered in lead. and i bribed the sexton to pull it away
when i’m laid there, and slide mine out too; i’ll have it made so: and
then by the time linton gets to us he’ll not know which is which!”

“you were very wicked, mr. heathcliff!” i exclaimed; “were you not
ashamed to disturb the dead?”

“i disturbed nobody, nelly,” he replied; “and i gave some ease to
myself. i shall be a great deal more comfortable now; and you’ll have a
better chance of keeping me underground, when i get there. disturbed
her? no! she has disturbed me, night and day, through eighteen
years—incessantly—remorselessly—till yesternight; and yesternight i was
tranquil. i dreamt i was sleeping the last sleep by that sleeper, with
my heart stopped and my cheek frozen against hers.”

“and if she had been dissolved into earth, or worse, what would you
have dreamt of then?” i said.

“of dissolving with her, and being more happy still!” he answered. “do
you suppose i dread any change of that sort? i expected such a
transformation on raising the lid, but i’m better pleased that it should
not commence till i share it. besides, unless i had received a distinct
impression of her passionless features, that strange feeling would
hardly have been removed. it began oddly. you know i was wild after she
died; and eternally, from dawn to dawn, praying her to return to me her
spirit! i have a strong faith in ghosts: i have a conviction that they
can, and do, exist among us! the day she was buried, there came a fall
of snow. in the evening i went to the churchyard. it blew bleak as
winter—all round was solitary. i didn’t fear that her fool of a husband
would wander up the glen so late; and no one else had business to bring
them there. being alone, and conscious two yards of loose earth was the
sole barrier between us, i said to myself—‘i’ll have her in my arms
again! if she be cold, i’ll think it is this north wind that chills
_me_; and if she be motionless, it is sleep.’ i got a spade from the
tool-house, and began to delve with all my might—it scraped the coffin;
i fell to work with my hands; the wood commenced cracking about the
screws; i was on the point of attaining my object, when it seemed that
i heard a sigh from some one above, close at the edge of the grave, and
bending down. ‘if i can only get this off,’ i muttered, ‘i wish they
may shovel in the earth over us both!’ and i wrenched at it more
desperately still. there was another sigh, close at my ear. i appeared
to feel the warm breath of it displacing the sleet-laden wind. i knew
no living thing in flesh and blood was by; but, as certainly as you
perceive the approach to some substantial body in the dark, though it
cannot be discerned, so certainly i felt that cathy was there: not
under me, but on the earth. a sudden sense of relief flowed from my
heart through every limb. i relinquished my labour of agony, and turned
consoled at once: unspeakably consoled. her presence was with me: it
remained while i re-filled the grave, and led me home. you may laugh,
if you will; but i was sure i should see her there. i was sure she was
with me, and i could not help talking to her. having reached the
heights, i rushed eagerly to the door. it was fastened; and, i
remember, that accursed earnshaw and my wife opposed my entrance. i
remember stopping to kick the breath out of him, and then hurrying
upstairs, to my room and hers. i looked round impatiently—i felt her by
me—i could _almost_ see her, and yet i _could not_! i ought to have
sweat blood then, from the anguish of my yearning—from the fervour of
my supplications to have but one glimpse! i had not one. she showed
herself, as she often was in life, a devil to me! and, since then,
sometimes more and sometimes less, i’ve been the sport of that
intolerable torture! infernal! keeping my nerves at such a stretch
that, if they had not resembled catgut, they would long ago have
relaxed to the feebleness of linton’s. when i sat in the house with
hareton, it seemed that on going out i should meet her; when i walked
on the moors i should meet her coming in. when i went from home i
hastened to return; she _must_ be somewhere at the heights, i was
certain! and when i slept in her chamber—i was beaten out of that. i
couldn’t lie there; for the moment i closed my eyes, she was either
outside the window, or sliding back the panels, or entering the room,
or even resting her darling head on the same pillow as she did when a
child; and i must open my lids to see. and so i opened and closed them
a hundred times a night—to be always disappointed! it racked me! i’ve
often groaned aloud, till that old rascal joseph no doubt believed that
my conscience was playing the fiend inside of me. now, since i’ve seen
her, i’m pacified—a little. it was a strange way of killing: not by
inches, but by fractions of hairbreadths, to beguile me with the
spectre of a hope through eighteen years!”

mr. heathcliff paused and wiped his forehead; his hair clung to it, wet
with perspiration; his eyes were fixed on the red embers of the fire,
the brows not contracted, but raised next the temples; diminishing the
grim aspect of his countenance, but imparting a peculiar look of
trouble, and a painful appearance of mental tension towards one
absorbing subject. he only half addressed me, and i maintained silence.
i didn’t like to hear him talk! after a short period he resumed his
meditation on the picture, took it down and leant it against the sofa
to contemplate it at better advantage; and while so occupied catherine
entered, announcing that she was ready, when her pony should be
saddled.

“send that over to-morrow,” said heathcliff to me; then turning to her,
he added: “you may do without your pony: it is a fine evening, and
you’ll need no ponies at wuthering heights; for what journeys you take,
your own feet will serve you. come along.”

“good-bye, ellen!” whispered my dear little mistress. as she kissed me,
her lips felt like ice. “come and see me, ellen; don’t forget.”

“take care you do no such thing, mrs. dean!” said her new father. “when
i wish to speak to you i’ll come here. i want none of your prying at my
house!”

he signed her to precede him; and casting back a look that cut my
heart, she obeyed. i watched them, from the window, walk down the
garden. heathcliff fixed catherine’s arm under his: though she disputed
the act at first evidently; and with rapid strides he hurried her into
the alley, whose trees concealed them.




chapter xxx


i have paid a visit to the heights, but i have not seen her since she
left: joseph held the door in his hand when i called to ask after her,
and wouldn’t let me pass. he said mrs. linton was “thrang,” and the
master was not in. zillah has told me something of the way they go on,
otherwise i should hardly know who was dead and who living. she thinks
catherine haughty, and does not like her, i can guess by her talk. my
young lady asked some aid of her when she first came; but mr.
heathcliff told her to follow her own business, and let his
daughter-in-law look after herself; and zillah willingly acquiesced,
being a narrow-minded, selfish woman. catherine evinced a child’s
annoyance at this neglect; repaid it with contempt, and thus enlisted
my informant among her enemies, as securely as if she had done her some
great wrong. i had a long talk with zillah about six weeks ago, a
little before you came, one day when we foregathered on the moor; and
this is what she told me.

“the first thing mrs. linton did,” she said, “on her arrival at the
heights, was to run upstairs, without even wishing good-evening to me
and joseph; she shut herself into linton’s room, and remained till
morning. then, while the master and earnshaw were at breakfast, she
entered the house, and asked all in a quiver if the doctor might be
sent for? her cousin was very ill.

“‘we know that!’ answered heathcliff; ‘but his life is not worth a
farthing, and i won’t spend a farthing on him.’

“‘but i cannot tell how to do,’ she said; ‘and if nobody will help me,
he’ll die!’

“‘walk out of the room,’ cried the master, ‘and let me never hear a
word more about him! none here care what becomes of him; if you do, act
the nurse; if you do not, lock him up and leave him.’

“then she began to bother me, and i said i’d had enough plague with the
tiresome thing; we each had our tasks, and hers was to wait on linton:
mr. heathcliff bid me leave that labour to her.

“how they managed together, i can’t tell. i fancy he fretted a great
deal, and moaned hisseln night and day; and she had precious little
rest: one could guess by her white face and heavy eyes. she sometimes
came into the kitchen all wildered like, and looked as if she would
fain beg assistance; but i was not going to disobey the master: i never
dare disobey him, mrs. dean; and, though i thought it wrong that
kenneth should not be sent for, it was no concern of mine either to
advise or complain, and i always refused to meddle. once or twice,
after we had gone to bed, i’ve happened to open my door again and seen
her sitting crying on the stairs’-top; and then i’ve shut myself in
quick, for fear of being moved to interfere. i did pity her then, i’m
sure: still i didn’t wish to lose my place, you know.

“at last, one night she came boldly into my chamber, and frightened me
out of my wits, by saying, ‘tell mr. heathcliff that his son is
dying—i’m sure he is, this time. get up, instantly, and tell him.’

“having uttered this speech, she vanished again. i lay a quarter of an
hour listening and trembling. nothing stirred—the house was quiet.

“she’s mistaken, i said to myself. he’s got over it. i needn’t disturb
them; and i began to doze. but my sleep was marred a second time by a
sharp ringing of the bell—the only bell we have, put up on purpose for
linton; and the master called to me to see what was the matter, and
inform them that he wouldn’t have that noise repeated.

“i delivered catherine’s message. he cursed to himself, and in a few
minutes came out with a lighted candle, and proceeded to their room. i
followed. mrs. heathcliff was seated by the bedside, with her hands
folded on her knees. her father-in-law went up, held the light to
linton’s face, looked at him, and touched him; afterwards he turned to
her.

“‘now—catherine,’ he said, ‘how do you feel?’

“she was dumb.

“‘how do you feel, catherine?’ he repeated.

“‘he’s safe, and i’m free,’ she answered: ‘i should feel well—but,’ she
continued, with a bitterness she couldn’t conceal, ‘you have left me so
long to struggle against death alone, that i feel and see only death! i
feel like death!’

“and she looked like it, too! i gave her a little wine. hareton and
joseph, who had been wakened by the ringing and the sound of feet, and
heard our talk from outside, now entered. joseph was fain, i believe,
of the lad’s removal; hareton seemed a thought bothered: though he was
more taken up with staring at catherine than thinking of linton. but
the master bid him get off to bed again: we didn’t want his help. he
afterwards made joseph remove the body to his chamber, and told me to
return to mine, and mrs. heathcliff remained by herself.

“in the morning, he sent me to tell her she must come down to
breakfast: she had undressed, and appeared going to sleep, and said she
was ill; at which i hardly wondered. i informed mr. heathcliff, and he
replied,—‘well, let her be till after the funeral; and go up now and
then to get her what is needful; and, as soon as she seems better, tell
me.’”

cathy stayed upstairs a fortnight, according to zillah; who visited her
twice a day, and would have been rather more friendly, but her attempts
at increasing kindness were proudly and promptly repelled.

heathcliff went up once, to show her linton’s will. he had bequeathed
the whole of his, and what had been her, moveable property, to his
father: the poor creature was threatened, or coaxed, into that act
during her week’s absence, when his uncle died. the lands, being a
minor, he could not meddle with. however, mr. heathcliff has claimed
and kept them in his wife’s right and his also: i suppose legally; at
any rate, catherine, destitute of cash and friends, cannot disturb his
possession.

“nobody,” said zillah, “ever approached her door, except that once, but
i; and nobody asked anything about her. the first occasion of her
coming down into the house was on a sunday afternoon. she had cried
out, when i carried up her dinner, that she couldn’t bear any longer
being in the cold; and i told her the master was going to thrushcross
grange, and earnshaw and i needn’t hinder her from descending; so, as
soon as she heard heathcliff’s horse trot off, she made her appearance,
donned in black, and her yellow curls combed back behind her ears as
plain as a quaker: she couldn’t comb them out.

“joseph and i generally go to chapel on sundays:” the kirk, (you know,
has no minister now, explained mrs. dean; and they call the methodists’
or baptists’ place, i can’t say which it is, at gimmerton, a chapel.)
“joseph had gone,” she continued, “but i thought proper to bide at
home. young folks are always the better for an elder’s over-looking;
and hareton, with all his bashfulness, isn’t a model of nice behaviour.
i let him know that his cousin would very likely sit with us, and she
had been always used to see the sabbath respected; so he had as good
leave his guns and bits of indoor work alone, while she stayed. he
coloured up at the news, and cast his eyes over his hands and clothes.
the train-oil and gunpowder were shoved out of sight in a minute. i saw
he meant to give her his company; and i guessed, by his way, he wanted
to be presentable; so, laughing, as i durst not laugh when the master
is by, i offered to help him, if he would, and joked at his confusion.
he grew sullen, and began to swear.

“now, mrs. dean,” zillah went on, seeing me not pleased by her manner,
“you happen think your young lady too fine for mr. hareton; and happen
you’re right: but i own i should love well to bring her pride a peg
lower. and what will all her learning and her daintiness do for her,
now? she’s as poor as you or i: poorer, i’ll be bound: you’re saving,
and i’m doing my little all that road.”

hareton allowed zillah to give him her aid; and she flattered him into
a good humour; so, when catherine came, half forgetting her former
insults, he tried to make himself agreeable, by the housekeeper’s
account.

“missis walked in,” she said, “as chill as an icicle, and as high as a
princess. i got up and offered her my seat in the arm-chair. no, she
turned up her nose at my civility. earnshaw rose, too, and bid her come
to the settle, and sit close by the fire: he was sure she was starved.

“‘i’ve been starved a month and more,’ she answered, resting on the
word as scornful as she could.

“and she got a chair for herself, and placed it at a distance from both
of us. having sat till she was warm, she began to look round, and
discovered a number of books on the dresser; she was instantly upon her
feet again, stretching to reach them: but they were too high up. her
cousin, after watching her endeavours a while, at last summoned courage
to help her; she held her frock, and he filled it with the first that
came to hand.

“that was a great advance for the lad. she didn’t thank him; still, he
felt gratified that she had accepted his assistance, and ventured to
stand behind as she examined them, and even to stoop and point out what
struck his fancy in certain old pictures which they contained; nor was
he daunted by the saucy style in which she jerked the page from his
finger: he contented himself with going a bit farther back and looking
at her instead of the book. she continued reading, or seeking for
something to read. his attention became, by degrees, quite centred in
the study of her thick silky curls: her face he couldn’t see, and she
couldn’t see him. and, perhaps, not quite awake to what he did, but
attracted like a child to a candle, at last he proceeded from staring
to touching; he put out his hand and stroked one curl, as gently as if
it were a bird. he might have stuck a knife into her neck, she started
round in such a taking.

“‘get away this moment! how dare you touch me? why are you stopping
there?’ she cried, in a tone of disgust. ‘i can’t endure you! i’ll go
upstairs again, if you come near me.’

“mr. hareton recoiled, looking as foolish as he could do: he sat down
in the settle very quiet, and she continued turning over her volumes
another half hour; finally, earnshaw crossed over, and whispered to me.

“‘will you ask her to read to us, zillah? i’m stalled of doing naught;
and i do like—i could like to hear her! dunnot say i wanted it, but ask
of yourseln.’

“‘mr. hareton wishes you would read to us, ma’am,’ i said, immediately.
‘he’d take it very kind—he’d be much obliged.’

“she frowned; and looking up, answered—

“‘mr. hareton, and the whole set of you, will be good enough to
understand that i reject any pretence at kindness you have the
hypocrisy to offer! i despise you, and will have nothing to say to any
of you! when i would have given my life for one kind word, even to see
one of your faces, you all kept off. but i won’t complain to you! i’m
driven down here by the cold; not either to amuse you or enjoy your
society.’

“‘what could i ha’ done?’ began earnshaw. ‘how was i to blame?’

“‘oh! you are an exception,’ answered mrs. heathcliff. ‘i never missed
such a concern as you.’

“‘but i offered more than once, and asked,’ he said, kindling up at her
pertness, ‘i asked mr. heathcliff to let me wake for you—’

“‘be silent! i’ll go out of doors, or anywhere, rather than have your
disagreeable voice in my ear!’ said my lady.

“hareton muttered she might go to hell, for him! and unslinging his
gun, restrained himself from his sunday occupations no longer. he
talked now, freely enough; and she presently saw fit to retreat to her
solitude: but the frost had set in, and, in spite of her pride, she was
forced to condescend to our company, more and more. however, i took
care there should be no further scorning at my good nature: ever since,
i’ve been as stiff as herself; and she has no lover or liker among us:
and she does not deserve one; for, let them say the least word to her,
and she’ll curl back without respect of any one. she’ll snap at the
master himself, and as good as dares him to thrash her; and the more
hurt she gets, the more venomous she grows.”

at first, on hearing this account from zillah, i determined to leave my
situation, take a cottage, and get catherine to come and live with me:
but mr. heathcliff would as soon permit that as he would set up hareton
in an independent house; and i can see no remedy, at present, unless
she could marry again; and that scheme it does not come within my
province to arrange.

* * * * *


thus ended mrs. dean’s story. notwithstanding the doctor’s prophecy, i
am rapidly recovering strength; and though it be only the second week
in january, i propose getting out on horseback in a day or two, and
riding over to wuthering heights, to inform my landlord that i shall
spend the next six months in london; and, if he likes, he may look out
for another tenant to take the place after october. i would not pass
another winter here for much.




chapter xxxi


yesterday was bright, calm, and frosty. i went to the heights as i
proposed: my housekeeper entreated me to bear a little note from her to
her young lady, and i did not refuse, for the worthy woman was not
conscious of anything odd in her request. the front door stood open,
but the jealous gate was fastened, as at my last visit; i knocked and
invoked earnshaw from among the garden-beds; he unchained it, and i
entered. the fellow is as handsome a rustic as need be seen. i took
particular notice of him this time; but then he does his best
apparently to make the least of his advantages.

i asked if mr. heathcliff were at home? he answered, no; but he would
be in at dinner-time. it was eleven o’clock, and i announced my
intention of going in and waiting for him; at which he immediately
flung down his tools and accompanied me, in the office of watchdog, not
as a substitute for the host.

we entered together; catherine was there, making herself useful in
preparing some vegetables for the approaching meal; she looked more
sulky and less spirited than when i had seen her first. she hardly
raised her eyes to notice me, and continued her employment with the
same disregard to common forms of politeness as before; never returning
my bow and good-morning by the slightest acknowledgment.

“she does not seem so amiable,” i thought, “as mrs. dean would persuade
me to believe. she’s a beauty, it is true; but not an angel.”

earnshaw surlily bid her remove her things to the kitchen. “remove them
yourself,” she said, pushing them from her as soon as she had done; and
retiring to a stool by the window, where she began to carve figures of
birds and beasts out of the turnip-parings in her lap. i approached
her, pretending to desire a view of the garden; and, as i fancied,
adroitly dropped mrs. dean’s note on to her knee, unnoticed by
hareton—but she asked aloud, “what is that?” and chucked it off.

“a letter from your old acquaintance, the housekeeper at the grange,” i
answered; annoyed at her exposing my kind deed, and fearful lest it
should be imagined a missive of my own. she would gladly have gathered
it up at this information, but hareton beat her; he seized and put it
in his waistcoat, saying mr. heathcliff should look at it first.
thereat, catherine silently turned her face from us, and, very
stealthily, drew out her pocket-handkerchief and applied it to her
eyes; and her cousin, after struggling awhile to keep down his softer
feelings, pulled out the letter and flung it on the floor beside her,
as ungraciously as he could. catherine caught and perused it eagerly;
then she put a few questions to me concerning the inmates, rational and
irrational, of her former home; and gazing towards the hills, murmured
in soliloquy:

“i should like to be riding minny down there! i should like to be
climbing up there! oh! i’m tired—i’m _stalled_, hareton!” and she leant
her pretty head back against the sill, with half a yawn and half a
sigh, and lapsed into an aspect of abstracted sadness: neither caring
nor knowing whether we remarked her.

“mrs. heathcliff,” i said, after sitting some time mute, “you are not
aware that i am an acquaintance of yours? so intimate that i think it
strange you won’t come and speak to me. my housekeeper never wearies of
talking about and praising you; and she’ll be greatly disappointed if i
return with no news of or from you, except that you received her letter
and said nothing!”

she appeared to wonder at this speech, and asked,—

“does ellen like you?”

“yes, very well,” i replied, hesitatingly.

“you must tell her,” she continued, “that i would answer her letter,
but i have no materials for writing: not even a book from which i might
tear a leaf.”

“no books!” i exclaimed. “how do you contrive to live here without
them? if i may take the liberty to inquire. though provided with a
large library, i’m frequently very dull at the grange; take my books
away, and i should be desperate!”

“i was always reading, when i had them,” said catherine; “and mr.
heathcliff never reads; so he took it into his head to destroy my
books. i have not had a glimpse of one for weeks. only once, i searched
through joseph’s store of theology, to his great irritation; and once,
hareton, i came upon a secret stock in your room—some latin and greek,
and some tales and poetry: all old friends. i brought the last here—and
you gathered them, as a magpie gathers silver spoons, for the mere love
of stealing! they are of no use to you; or else you concealed them in
the bad spirit that, as you cannot enjoy them, nobody else shall.
perhaps _your_ envy counselled mr. heathcliff to rob me of my
treasures? but i’ve most of them written on my brain and printed in my
heart, and you cannot deprive me of those!”

earnshaw blushed crimson when his cousin made this revelation of his
private literary accumulations, and stammered an indignant denial of
her accusations.

“mr. hareton is desirous of increasing his amount of knowledge,” i
said, coming to his rescue. “he is not _envious_, but _emulous_ of your
attainments. he’ll be a clever scholar in a few years.”

“and he wants me to sink into a dunce, meantime,” answered catherine.
“yes, i hear him trying to spell and read to himself, and pretty
blunders he makes! i wish you would repeat chevy chase as you did
yesterday: it was extremely funny. i heard you; and i heard you turning
over the dictionary to seek out the hard words, and then cursing
because you couldn’t read their explanations!”

the young man evidently thought it too bad that he should be laughed at
for his ignorance, and then laughed at for trying to remove it. i had a
similar notion; and, remembering mrs. dean’s anecdote of his first
attempt at enlightening the darkness in which he had been reared, i
observed,—“but, mrs. heathcliff, we have each had a commencement, and
each stumbled and tottered on the threshold; had our teachers scorned
instead of aiding us, we should stumble and totter yet.”

“oh!” she replied, “i don’t wish to limit his acquirements: still, he
has no right to appropriate what is mine, and make it ridiculous to me
with his vile mistakes and mispronunciations! those books, both prose
and verse, are consecrated to me by other associations; and i hate to
have them debased and profaned in his mouth! besides, of all, he has
selected my favourite pieces that i love the most to repeat, as if out
of deliberate malice.”

hareton’s chest heaved in silence a minute: he laboured under a severe
sense of mortification and wrath, which it was no easy task to
suppress. i rose, and, from a gentlemanly idea of relieving his
embarrassment, took up my station in the doorway, surveying the
external prospect as i stood. he followed my example, and left the
room; but presently reappeared, bearing half a dozen volumes in his
hands, which he threw into catherine’s lap, exclaiming,—“take them! i
never want to hear, or read, or think of them again!”

“i won’t have them now,” she answered. “i shall connect them with you,
and hate them.”

she opened one that had obviously been often turned over, and read a
portion in the drawling tone of a beginner; then laughed, and threw it
from her. “and listen,” she continued, provokingly, commencing a verse
of an old ballad in the same fashion.

but his self-love would endure no further torment: i heard, and not
altogether disapprovingly, a manual check given to her saucy tongue.
the little wretch had done her utmost to hurt her cousin’s sensitive
though uncultivated feelings, and a physical argument was the only mode
he had of balancing the account, and repaying its effects on the
inflictor. he afterwards gathered the books and hurled them on the
fire. i read in his countenance what anguish it was to offer that
sacrifice to spleen. i fancied that as they consumed, he recalled the
pleasure they had already imparted, and the triumph and ever-increasing
pleasure he had anticipated from them; and i fancied i guessed the
incitement to his secret studies also. he had been content with daily
labour and rough animal enjoyments, till catherine crossed his path.
shame at her scorn, and hope of her approval, were his first prompters
to higher pursuits; and instead of guarding him from one and winning
him to the other, his endeavours to raise himself had produced just the
contrary result.

“yes, that’s all the good that such a brute as you can get from them!”
cried catherine, sucking her damaged lip, and watching the
conflagration with indignant eyes.

“you’d _better_ hold your tongue, now,” he answered fiercely.

and his agitation precluded further speech; he advanced hastily to the
entrance, where i made way for him to pass. but ere he had crossed the
door-stones, mr. heathcliff, coming up the causeway, encountered him,
and laying hold of his shoulder asked,—“what’s to do now, my lad?”

“naught, naught,” he said, and broke away to enjoy his grief and anger
in solitude.

heathcliff gazed after him, and sighed.

“it will be odd if i thwart myself,” he muttered, unconscious that i
was behind him. “but when i look for his father in his face, i find
_her_ every day more! how the devil is he so like? i can hardly bear to
see him.”

he bent his eyes to the ground, and walked moodily in. there was a
restless, anxious expression in his countenance, i had never remarked
there before; and he looked sparer in person. his daughter-in-law, on
perceiving him through the window, immediately escaped to the kitchen,
so that i remained alone.

“i’m glad to see you out of doors again, mr. lockwood,” he said, in
reply to my greeting; “from selfish motives partly: i don’t think i
could readily supply your loss in this desolation. i’ve wondered more
than once what brought you here.”

“an idle whim, i fear, sir,” was my answer; “or else an idle whim is
going to spirit me away. i shall set out for london next week; and i
must give you warning that i feel no disposition to retain thrushcross
grange beyond the twelve months i agreed to rent it. i believe i shall
not live there any more.”

“oh, indeed; you’re tired of being banished from the world, are you?”
he said. “but if you be coming to plead off paying for a place you
won’t occupy, your journey is useless: i never relent in exacting my
due from any one.”

“i’m coming to plead off nothing about it,” i exclaimed, considerably
irritated. “should you wish it, i’ll settle with you now,” and i drew
my note-book from my pocket.

“no, no,” he replied, coolly; “you’ll leave sufficient behind to cover
your debts, if you fail to return: i’m not in such a hurry. sit down
and take your dinner with us; a guest that is safe from repeating his
visit can generally be made welcome. catherine! bring the things in:
where are you?”

catherine reappeared, bearing a tray of knives and forks.

“you may get your dinner with joseph,” muttered heathcliff, aside, “and
remain in the kitchen till he is gone.”

she obeyed his directions very punctually: perhaps she had no
temptation to transgress. living among clowns and misanthropists, she
probably cannot appreciate a better class of people when she meets
them.

with mr. heathcliff, grim and saturnine, on the one hand, and hareton,
absolutely dumb, on the other, i made a somewhat cheerless meal, and
bade adieu early. i would have departed by the back way, to get a last
glimpse of catherine and annoy old joseph; but hareton received orders
to lead up my horse, and my host himself escorted me to the door, so i
could not fulfil my wish.

“how dreary life gets over in that house!” i reflected, while riding
down the road. “what a realisation of something more romantic than a
fairy tale it would have been for mrs. linton heathcliff, had she and i
struck up an attachment, as her good nurse desired, and migrated
together into the stirring atmosphere of the town!”




chapter xxxii


1802.—this september i was invited to devastate the moors of a friend
in the north, and on my journey to his abode, i unexpectedly came
within fifteen miles of gimmerton. the ostler at a roadside
public-house was holding a pail of water to refresh my horses, when a
cart of very green oats, newly reaped, passed by, and he
remarked,—“yon’s frough gimmerton, nah! they’re allas three wick’ after
other folk wi’ ther harvest.”

“gimmerton?” i repeated—my residence in that locality had already grown
dim and dreamy. “ah! i know. how far is it from this?”

“happen fourteen mile o’er th’ hills; and a rough road,” he answered.

a sudden impulse seized me to visit thrushcross grange. it was scarcely
noon, and i conceived that i might as well pass the night under my own
roof as in an inn. besides, i could spare a day easily to arrange
matters with my landlord, and thus save myself the trouble of invading
the neighbourhood again. having rested awhile, i directed my servant to
inquire the way to the village; and, with great fatigue to our beasts,
we managed the distance in some three hours.

i left him there, and proceeded down the valley alone. the grey church
looked greyer, and the lonely churchyard lonelier. i distinguished a
moor-sheep cropping the short turf on the graves. it was sweet, warm
weather—too warm for travelling; but the heat did not hinder me from
enjoying the delightful scenery above and below: had i seen it nearer
august, i’m sure it would have tempted me to waste a month among its
solitudes. in winter nothing more dreary, in summer nothing more
divine, than those glens shut in by hills, and those bluff, bold swells
of heath.

i reached the grange before sunset, and knocked for admittance; but the
family had retreated into the back premises, i judged, by one thin,
blue wreath, curling from the kitchen chimney, and they did not hear. i
rode into the court. under the porch, a girl of nine or ten sat
knitting, and an old woman reclined on the housesteps, smoking a
meditative pipe.

“is mrs. dean within?” i demanded of the dame.

“mistress dean? nay!” she answered, “she doesn’t bide here: shoo’s up
at th’ heights.”

“are you the housekeeper, then?” i continued.

“eea, aw keep th’ hause,” she replied.

“well, i’m mr. lockwood, the master. are there any rooms to lodge me
in, i wonder? i wish to stay all night.”

“t’ maister!” she cried in astonishment. “whet, whoiver knew yah wur
coming? yah sud ha’ send word. they’s nowt norther dry nor mensful
abaht t’ place: nowt there isn’t!”

she threw down her pipe and bustled in, the girl followed, and i
entered too; soon perceiving that her report was true, and, moreover,
that i had almost upset her wits by my unwelcome apparition, i bade her
be composed. i would go out for a walk; and, meantime she must try to
prepare a corner of a sitting-room for me to sup in, and a bedroom to
sleep in. no sweeping and dusting, only good fire and dry sheets were
necessary. she seemed willing to do her best; though she thrust the
hearth-brush into the grates in mistake for the poker, and
malappropriated several other articles of her craft: but i retired,
confiding in her energy for a resting-place against my return.
wuthering heights was the goal of my proposed excursion. an
after-thought brought me back, when i had quitted the court.

“all well at the heights?” i inquired of the woman.

“eea, f’r owt ee knaw!” she answered, skurrying away with a pan of hot
cinders.

i would have asked why mrs. dean had deserted the grange, but it was
impossible to delay her at such a crisis, so i turned away and made my
exit, rambling leisurely along, with the glow of a sinking sun behind,
and the mild glory of a rising moon in front—one fading, and the other
brightening—as i quitted the park, and climbed the stony by-road
branching off to mr. heathcliff’s dwelling. before i arrived in sight
of it, all that remained of day was a beamless amber light along the
west: but i could see every pebble on the path, and every blade of
grass, by that splendid moon. i had neither to climb the gate nor to
knock—it yielded to my hand. that is an improvement, i thought. and i
noticed another, by the aid of my nostrils; a fragrance of stocks and
wallflowers wafted on the air from amongst the homely fruit-trees.

both doors and lattices were open; and yet, as is usually the case in a
coal-district, a fine red fire illumined the chimney: the comfort which
the eye derives from it renders the extra heat endurable. but the house
of wuthering heights is so large that the inmates have plenty of space
for withdrawing out of its influence; and accordingly what inmates
there were had stationed themselves not far from one of the windows. i
could both see them and hear them talk before i entered, and looked and
listened in consequence; being moved thereto by a mingled sense of
curiosity and envy, that grew as i lingered.

“con-_trary_!” said a voice as sweet as a silver bell. “that for the
third time, you dunce! i’m not going to tell you again. recollect, or
i’ll pull your hair!”

“contrary, then,” answered another, in deep but softened tones. “and
now, kiss me, for minding so well.”

“no, read it over first correctly, without a single mistake.”

the male speaker began to read: he was a young man, respectably dressed
and seated at a table, having a book before him. his handsome features
glowed with pleasure, and his eyes kept impatiently wandering from the
page to a small white hand over his shoulder, which recalled him by a
smart slap on the cheek, whenever its owner detected such signs of
inattention. its owner stood behind; her light, shining ringlets
blending, at intervals, with his brown locks, as she bent to
superintend his studies; and her face—it was lucky he could not see her
face, or he would never have been so steady. i could; and i bit my lip
in spite, at having thrown away the chance i might have had of doing
something besides staring at its smiting beauty.

the task was done, not free from further blunders; but the pupil
claimed a reward, and received at least five kisses; which, however, he
generously returned. then they came to the door, and from their
conversation i judged they were about to issue out and have a walk on
the moors. i supposed i should be condemned in hareton earnshaw’s
heart, if not by his mouth, to the lowest pit in the infernal regions
if i showed my unfortunate person in his neighbourhood then; and
feeling very mean and malignant, i skulked round to seek refuge in the
kitchen. there was unobstructed admittance on that side also; and at
the door sat my old friend nelly dean, sewing and singing a song; which
was often interrupted from within by harsh words of scorn and
intolerance, uttered in far from musical accents.

“i’d rayther, by th’ haulf, hev’ ’em swearing i’ my lugs fro’h morn to
neeght, nor hearken ye hahsiver!” said the tenant of the kitchen, in
answer to an unheard speech of nelly’s. “it’s a blazing shame, that i
cannot oppen t’ blessed book, but yah set up them glories to sattan,
and all t’ flaysome wickednesses that iver were born into th’ warld!
oh! ye’re a raight nowt; and shoo’s another; and that poor lad ’ll be
lost atween ye. poor lad!” he added, with a groan; “he’s witched: i’m
sartin on’t. oh, lord, judge ’em, for there’s norther law nor justice
among wer rullers!”

“no! or we should be sitting in flaming fagots, i suppose,” retorted
the singer. “but wisht, old man, and read your bible like a christian,
and never mind me. this is ‘fairy annie’s wedding’—a bonny tune—it goes
to a dance.”

mrs. dean was about to recommence, when i advanced; and recognising me
directly, she jumped to her feet, crying—“why, bless you, mr. lockwood!
how could you think of returning in this way? all’s shut up at
thrushcross grange. you should have given us notice!”

“i’ve arranged to be accommodated there, for as long as i shall stay,”
i answered. “i depart again to-morrow. and how are you transplanted
here, mrs. dean? tell me that.”

“zillah left, and mr. heathcliff wished me to come, soon after you went
to london, and stay till you returned. but, step in, pray! have you
walked from gimmerton this evening?”

“from the grange,” i replied; “and while they make me lodging room
there, i want to finish my business with your master; because i don’t
think of having another opportunity in a hurry.”

“what business, sir?” said nelly, conducting me into the house. “he’s
gone out at present, and won’t return soon.”

“about the rent,” i answered.

“oh! then it is with mrs. heathcliff you must settle,” she observed;
“or rather with me. she has not learnt to manage her affairs yet, and i
act for her: there’s nobody else.”

i looked surprised.

“ah! you have not heard of heathcliff’s death, i see,” she continued.

“heathcliff dead!” i exclaimed, astonished. “how long ago?”

“three months since: but sit down, and let me take your hat, and i’ll
tell you all about it. stop, you have had nothing to eat, have you?”

“i want nothing: i have ordered supper at home. you sit down too. i
never dreamt of his dying! let me hear how it came to pass. you say you
don’t expect them back for some time—the young people?”

“no—i have to scold them every evening for their late rambles: but they
don’t care for me. at least, have a drink of our old ale; it will do
you good: you seem weary.”

she hastened to fetch it before i could refuse, and i heard joseph
asking whether “it warn’t a crying scandal that she should have
followers at her time of life? and then, to get them jocks out o’ t’
maister’s cellar! he fair shaamed to ’bide still and see it.”

she did not stay to retaliate, but re-entered in a minute, bearing a
reaming silver pint, whose contents i lauded with becoming earnestness.
and afterwards she furnished me with the sequel of heathcliff’s
history. he had a “queer” end, as she expressed it.

* * * * *


i was summoned to wuthering heights, within a fortnight of your leaving
us, she said; and i obeyed joyfully, for catherine’s sake. my first
interview with her grieved and shocked me: she had altered so much
since our separation. mr. heathcliff did not explain his reasons for
taking a new mind about my coming here; he only told me he wanted me,
and he was tired of seeing catherine: i must make the little parlour my
sitting-room, and keep her with me. it was enough if he were obliged to
see her once or twice a day. she seemed pleased at this arrangement;
and, by degrees, i smuggled over a great number of books, and other
articles, that had formed her amusement at the grange; and flattered
myself we should get on in tolerable comfort. the delusion did not last
long. catherine, contented at first, in a brief space grew irritable
and restless. for one thing, she was forbidden to move out of the
garden, and it fretted her sadly to be confined to its narrow bounds as
spring drew on; for another, in following the house, i was forced to
quit her frequently, and she complained of loneliness: she preferred
quarrelling with joseph in the kitchen to sitting at peace in her
solitude. i did not mind their skirmishes: but hareton was often
obliged to seek the kitchen also, when the master wanted to have the
house to himself; and though in the beginning she either left it at his
approach, or quietly joined in my occupations, and shunned remarking or
addressing him—and though he was always as sullen and silent as
possible—after a while, she changed her behaviour, and became incapable
of letting him alone: talking at him; commenting on his stupidity and
idleness; expressing her wonder how he could endure the life he
lived—how he could sit a whole evening staring into the fire, and
dozing.

“he’s just like a dog, is he not, ellen?” she once observed, “or a
cart-horse? he does his work, eats his food, and sleeps eternally! what
a blank, dreary mind he must have! do you ever dream, hareton? and, if
you do, what is it about? but you can’t speak to me!”

then she looked at him; but he would neither open his mouth nor look
again.

“he’s, perhaps, dreaming now,” she continued. “he twitched his shoulder
as juno twitches hers. ask him, ellen.”

“mr. hareton will ask the master to send you upstairs, if you don’t
behave!” i said. he had not only twitched his shoulder but clenched his
fist, as if tempted to use it.

“i know why hareton never speaks, when i am in the kitchen,” she
exclaimed, on another occasion. “he is afraid i shall laugh at him.
ellen, what do you think? he began to teach himself to read once; and,
because i laughed, he burned his books, and dropped it: was he not a
fool?”

“were not you naughty?” i said; “answer me that.”

“perhaps i was,” she went on; “but i did not expect him to be so silly.
hareton, if i gave you a book, would you take it now? i’ll try!”

she placed one she had been perusing on his hand; he flung it off, and
muttered, if she did not give over, he would break her neck.

“well, i shall put it here,” she said, “in the table-drawer; and i’m
going to bed.”

then she whispered me to watch whether he touched it, and departed. but
he would not come near it; and so i informed her in the morning, to her
great disappointment. i saw she was sorry for his persevering sulkiness
and indolence: her conscience reproved her for frightening him off
improving himself: she had done it effectually. but her ingenuity was
at work to remedy the injury: while i ironed, or pursued other such
stationary employments as i could not well do in the parlour, she would
bring some pleasant volume and read it aloud to me. when hareton was
there, she generally paused in an interesting part, and left the book
lying about: that she did repeatedly; but he was as obstinate as a
mule, and, instead of snatching at her bait, in wet weather he took to
smoking with joseph; and they sat like automatons, one on each side of
the fire, the elder happily too deaf to understand her wicked nonsense,
as he would have called it, the younger doing his best to seem to
disregard it. on fine evenings the latter followed his shooting
expeditions, and catherine yawned and sighed, and teased me to talk to
her, and ran off into the court or garden the moment i began; and, as a
last resource, cried, and said she was tired of living: her life was
useless.

mr. heathcliff, who grew more and more disinclined to society, had
almost banished earnshaw from his apartment. owing to an accident at
the commencement of march, he became for some days a fixture in the
kitchen. his gun burst while out on the hills by himself; a splinter
cut his arm, and he lost a good deal of blood before he could reach
home. the consequence was that, perforce, he was condemned to the
fireside and tranquillity, till he made it up again. it suited
catherine to have him there: at any rate, it made her hate her room
upstairs more than ever: and she would compel me to find out business
below, that she might accompany me.

on easter monday, joseph went to gimmerton fair with some cattle; and,
in the afternoon, i was busy getting up linen in the kitchen. earnshaw
sat, morose as usual, at the chimney corner, and my little mistress was
beguiling an idle hour with drawing pictures on the window-panes,
varying her amusement by smothered bursts of songs, and whispered
ejaculations, and quick glances of annoyance and impatience in the
direction of her cousin, who steadfastly smoked, and looked into the
grate. at a notice that i could do with her no longer intercepting my
light, she removed to the hearthstone. i bestowed little attention on
her proceedings, but, presently, i heard her begin—“i’ve found out,
hareton, that i want—that i’m glad—that i should like you to be my
cousin now, if you had not grown so cross to me, and so rough.”

hareton returned no answer.

“hareton, hareton, hareton! do you hear?” she continued.

“get off wi’ ye!” he growled, with uncompromising gruffness.

“let me take that pipe,” she said, cautiously advancing her hand and
abstracting it from his mouth.

before he could attempt to recover it, it was broken, and behind the
fire. he swore at her and seized another.

“stop,” she cried, “you must listen to me first; and i can’t speak
while those clouds are floating in my face.”

“will you go to the devil!” he exclaimed, ferociously, “and let me be!”

“no,” she persisted, “i won’t: i can’t tell what to do to make you talk
to me; and you are determined not to understand. when i call you
stupid, i don’t mean anything: i don’t mean that i despise you. come,
you shall take notice of me, hareton: you are my cousin, and you shall
own me.”

“i shall have naught to do wi’ you and your mucky pride, and your
damned mocking tricks!” he answered. “i’ll go to hell, body and soul,
before i look sideways after you again. side out o’ t’ gate, now, this
minute!”

catherine frowned, and retreated to the window-seat chewing her lip,
and endeavouring, by humming an eccentric tune, to conceal a growing
tendency to sob.

“you should be friends with your cousin, mr. hareton,” i interrupted,
“since she repents of her sauciness. it would do you a great deal of
good: it would make you another man to have her for a companion.”

“a companion!” he cried; “when she hates me, and does not think me fit
to wipe her shoon! nay, if it made me a king, i’d not be scorned for
seeking her good-will any more.”

“it is not i who hate you, it is you who hate me!” wept cathy, no
longer disguising her trouble. “you hate me as much as mr. heathcliff
does, and more.”

“you’re a damned liar,” began earnshaw: “why have i made him angry, by
taking your part, then, a hundred times? and that when you sneered at
and despised me, and—go on plaguing me, and i’ll step in yonder, and
say you worried me out of the kitchen!”

“i didn’t know you took my part,” she answered, drying her eyes; “and i
was miserable and bitter at everybody; but now i thank you, and beg you
to forgive me: what can i do besides?”

she returned to the hearth, and frankly extended her hand. he blackened
and scowled like a thunder-cloud, and kept his fists resolutely
clenched, and his gaze fixed on the ground. catherine, by instinct,
must have divined it was obdurate perversity, and not dislike, that
prompted this dogged conduct; for, after remaining an instant
undecided, she stooped and impressed on his cheek a gentle kiss. the
little rogue thought i had not seen her, and, drawing back, she took
her former station by the window, quite demurely. i shook my head
reprovingly, and then she blushed and whispered—“well! what should i
have done, ellen? he wouldn’t shake hands, and he wouldn’t look: i must
show him some way that i like him—that i want to be friends.”

whether the kiss convinced hareton, i cannot tell: he was very careful,
for some minutes, that his face should not be seen, and when he did
raise it, he was sadly puzzled where to turn his eyes.

catherine employed herself in wrapping a handsome book neatly in white
paper, and having tied it with a bit of ribbon, and addressed it to
“mr. hareton earnshaw,” she desired me to be her ambassadress, and
convey the present to its destined recipient.

“and tell him, if he’ll take it, i’ll come and teach him to read it
right,” she said; “and, if he refuse it, i’ll go upstairs, and never
tease him again.”

i carried it, and repeated the message; anxiously watched by my
employer. hareton would not open his fingers, so i laid it on his knee.
he did not strike it off, either. i returned to my work. catherine
leaned her head and arms on the table, till she heard the slight rustle
of the covering being removed; then she stole away, and quietly seated
herself beside her cousin. he trembled, and his face glowed: all his
rudeness and all his surly harshness had deserted him: he could not
summon courage, at first, to utter a syllable in reply to her
questioning look, and her murmured petition.

“say you forgive me, hareton, do. you can make me so happy by speaking
that little word.”

he muttered something inaudible.

“and you’ll be my friend?” added catherine, interrogatively.

“nay, you’ll be ashamed of me every day of your life,” he answered;
“and the more ashamed, the more you know me; and i cannot bide it.”

“so you won’t be my friend?” she said, smiling as sweet as honey, and
creeping close up.

i overheard no further distinguishable talk, but, on looking round
again, i perceived two such radiant countenances bent over the page of
the accepted book, that i did not doubt the treaty had been ratified on
both sides; and the enemies were, thenceforth, sworn allies.

the work they studied was full of costly pictures; and those and their
position had charm enough to keep them unmoved till joseph came home.
he, poor man, was perfectly aghast at the spectacle of catherine seated
on the same bench with hareton earnshaw, leaning her hand on his
shoulder; and confounded at his favourite’s endurance of her proximity:
it affected him too deeply to allow an observation on the subject that
night. his emotion was only revealed by the immense sighs he drew, as
he solemnly spread his large bible on the table, and overlaid it with
dirty bank-notes from his pocket-book, the produce of the day’s
transactions. at length he summoned hareton from his seat.

“tak’ these in to t’ maister, lad,” he said, “and bide there. i’s gang
up to my own rahm. this hoile’s neither mensful nor seemly for us: we
mun side out and seearch another.”

“come, catherine,” i said, “we must ‘side out’ too: i’ve done my
ironing. are you ready to go?”

“it is not eight o’clock!” she answered, rising unwillingly. “hareton,
i’ll leave this book upon the chimney-piece, and i’ll bring some more
to-morrow.”

“ony books that yah leave, i shall tak’ into th’ hahse,” said joseph,
“and it’ll be mitch if yah find ’em agean; soa, yah may plase yerseln!”

cathy threatened that his library should pay for hers; and, smiling as
she passed hareton, went singing upstairs: lighter of heart, i venture
to say, than ever she had been under that roof before; except, perhaps,
during her earliest visits to linton.

the intimacy thus commenced grew rapidly; though it encountered
temporary interruptions. earnshaw was not to be civilized with a wish,
and my young lady was no philosopher, and no paragon of patience; but
both their minds tending to the same point—one loving and desiring to
esteem, and the other loving and desiring to be esteemed—they contrived
in the end to reach it.

you see, mr. lockwood, it was easy enough to win mrs. heathcliff’s
heart. but now, i’m glad you did not try. the crown of all my wishes
will be the union of those two. i shall envy no one on their wedding
day: there won’t be a happier woman than myself in england!




chapter xxxiii


on the morrow of that monday, earnshaw being still unable to follow his
ordinary employments, and therefore remaining about the house, i
speedily found it would be impracticable to retain my charge beside me,
as heretofore. she got downstairs before me, and out into the garden,
where she had seen her cousin performing some easy work; and when i
went to bid them come to breakfast, i saw she had persuaded him to
clear a large space of ground from currant and gooseberry bushes, and
they were busy planning together an importation of plants from the
grange.

i was terrified at the devastation which had been accomplished in a
brief half-hour; the black-currant trees were the apple of joseph’s
eye, and she had just fixed her choice of a flower-bed in the midst of
them.

“there! that will be all shown to the master,” i exclaimed, “the minute
it is discovered. and what excuse have you to offer for taking such
liberties with the garden? we shall have a fine explosion on the head
of it: see if we don’t! mr. hareton, i wonder you should have no more
wit than to go and make that mess at her bidding!”

“i’d forgotten they were joseph’s,” answered earnshaw, rather puzzled;
“but i’ll tell him i did it.”

we always ate our meals with mr. heathcliff. i held the mistress’s post
in making tea and carving; so i was indispensable at table. catherine
usually sat by me, but to-day she stole nearer to hareton; and i
presently saw she would have no more discretion in her friendship than
she had in her hostility.

“now, mind you don’t talk with and notice your cousin too much,” were
my whispered instructions as we entered the room. “it will certainly
annoy mr. heathcliff, and he’ll be mad at you both.”

“i’m not going to,” she answered.

the minute after, she had sidled to him, and was sticking primroses in
his plate of porridge.

he dared not speak to her there: he dared hardly look; and yet she went
on teasing, till he was twice on the point of being provoked to laugh.
i frowned, and then she glanced towards the master: whose mind was
occupied on other subjects than his company, as his countenance
evinced; and she grew serious for an instant, scrutinizing him with
deep gravity. afterwards she turned, and recommenced her nonsense; at
last, hareton uttered a smothered laugh. mr. heathcliff started; his
eye rapidly surveyed our faces. catherine met it with her accustomed
look of nervousness and yet defiance, which he abhorred.

“it is well you are out of my reach,” he exclaimed. “what fiend
possesses you to stare back at me, continually, with those infernal
eyes? down with them! and don’t remind me of your existence again. i
thought i had cured you of laughing.”

“it was me,” muttered hareton.

“what do you say?” demanded the master.

hareton looked at his plate, and did not repeat the confession. mr.
heathcliff looked at him a bit, and then silently resumed his breakfast
and his interrupted musing. we had nearly finished, and the two young
people prudently shifted wider asunder, so i anticipated no further
disturbance during that sitting: when joseph appeared at the door,
revealing by his quivering lip and furious eyes that the outrage
committed on his precious shrubs was detected. he must have seen cathy
and her cousin about the spot before he examined it, for while his jaws
worked like those of a cow chewing its cud, and rendered his speech
difficult to understand, he began:—

“i mun hev’ my wage, and i mun goa! i _hed_ aimed to dee wheare i’d
sarved fur sixty year; and i thowt i’d lug my books up into t’ garret,
and all my bits o’ stuff, and they sud hev’ t’ kitchen to theirseln;
for t’ sake o’ quietness. it wur hard to gie up my awn hearthstun, but
i thowt i _could_ do that! but nah, shoo’s taan my garden fro’ me, and
by th’ heart, maister, i cannot stand it! yah may bend to th’ yoak an
ye will—i noan used to ’t, and an old man doesn’t sooin get used to new
barthens. i’d rayther arn my bite an’ my sup wi’ a hammer in th’ road!”

“now, now, idiot!” interrupted heathcliff, “cut it short! what’s your
grievance? i’ll interfere in no quarrels between you and nelly. she may
thrust you into the coal-hole for anything i care.”

“it’s noan nelly!” answered joseph. “i sudn’t shift for nelly—nasty ill
nowt as shoo is. thank god! _shoo_ cannot stale t’ sowl o’ nob’dy! shoo
wer niver soa handsome, but what a body mud look at her ’bout winking.
it’s yon flaysome, graceless quean, that’s witched our lad, wi’ her
bold een and her forrard ways—till—nay! it fair brusts my heart! he’s
forgotten all i’ve done for him, and made on him, and goan and riven up
a whole row o’ t’ grandest currant-trees i’ t’ garden!” and here he
lamented outright; unmanned by a sense of his bitter injuries, and
earnshaw’s ingratitude and dangerous condition.

“is the fool drunk?” asked mr. heathcliff. “hareton, is it you he’s
finding fault with?”

“i’ve pulled up two or three bushes,” replied the young man; “but i’m
going to set ’em again.”

“and why have you pulled them up?” said the master.

catherine wisely put in her tongue.

“we wanted to plant some flowers there,” she cried. “i’m the only
person to blame, for i wished him to do it.”

“and who the devil gave _you_ leave to touch a stick about the place?”
demanded her father-in-law, much surprised. “and who ordered _you_ to
obey her?” he added, turning to hareton.

the latter was speechless; his cousin replied—“you shouldn’t grudge a
few yards of earth for me to ornament, when you have taken all my
land!”

“your land, insolent slut! you never had any,” said heathcliff.

“and my money,” she continued; returning his angry glare, and meantime
biting a piece of crust, the remnant of her breakfast.

“silence!” he exclaimed. “get done, and begone!”

“and hareton’s land, and his money,” pursued the reckless thing.
“hareton and i are friends now; and i shall tell him all about you!”

the master seemed confounded a moment: he grew pale, and rose up,
eyeing her all the while, with an expression of mortal hate.

“if you strike me, hareton will strike you,” she said; “so you may as
well sit down.”

“if hareton does not turn you out of the room, i’ll strike him to
hell,” thundered heathcliff. “damnable witch! dare you pretend to rouse
him against me? off with her! do you hear? fling her into the kitchen!
i’ll kill her, ellen dean, if you let her come into my sight again!”

hareton tried, under his breath, to persuade her to go.

“drag her away!” he cried, savagely. “are you staying to talk?” and he
approached to execute his own command.

“he’ll not obey you, wicked man, any more,” said catherine; “and he’ll
soon detest you as much as i do.”

“wisht! wisht!” muttered the young man, reproachfully; “i will not hear
you speak so to him. have done.”

“but you won’t let him strike me?” she cried.

“come, then,” he whispered earnestly.

it was too late: heathcliff had caught hold of her.

“now, _you_ go!” he said to earnshaw. “accursed witch! this time she
has provoked me when i could not bear it; and i’ll make her repent it
for ever!”

he had his hand in her hair; hareton attempted to release her locks,
entreating him not to hurt her that once. heathcliff’s black eyes
flashed; he seemed ready to tear catherine in pieces, and i was just
worked up to risk coming to the rescue, when of a sudden his fingers
relaxed; he shifted his grasp from her head to her arm, and gazed
intently in her face. then he drew his hand over his eyes, stood a
moment to collect himself apparently, and turning anew to catherine,
said, with assumed calmness—“you must learn to avoid putting me in a
passion, or i shall really murder you some time! go with mrs. dean, and
keep with her; and confine your insolence to her ears. as to hareton
earnshaw, if i see him listen to you, i’ll send him seeking his bread
where he can get it! your love will make him an outcast and a beggar.
nelly, take her; and leave me, all of you! leave me!”

i led my young lady out: she was too glad of her escape to resist; the
other followed, and mr. heathcliff had the room to himself till dinner.
i had counselled catherine to dine upstairs; but, as soon as he
perceived her vacant seat, he sent me to call her. he spoke to none of
us, ate very little, and went out directly afterwards, intimating that
he should not return before evening.

the two new friends established themselves in the house during his
absence; where i heard hareton sternly check his cousin, on her
offering a revelation of her father-in-law’s conduct to his father. he
said he wouldn’t suffer a word to be uttered in his disparagement: if
he were the devil, it didn’t signify; he would stand by him; and he’d
rather she would abuse himself, as she used to, than begin on mr.
heathcliff. catherine was waxing cross at this; but he found means to
make her hold her tongue, by asking how she would like _him_ to speak
ill of her father? then she comprehended that earnshaw took the
master’s reputation home to himself; and was attached by ties stronger
than reason could break—chains, forged by habit, which it would be
cruel to attempt to loosen. she showed a good heart, thenceforth, in
avoiding both complaints and expressions of antipathy concerning
heathcliff; and confessed to me her sorrow that she had endeavoured to
raise a bad spirit between him and hareton: indeed, i don’t believe she
has ever breathed a syllable, in the latter’s hearing, against her
oppressor since.

when this slight disagreement was over, they were friends again, and as
busy as possible in their several occupations of pupil and teacher. i
came in to sit with them, after i had done my work; and i felt so
soothed and comforted to watch them, that i did not notice how time got
on. you know, they both appeared in a measure my children: i had long
been proud of one; and now, i was sure, the other would be a source of
equal satisfaction. his honest, warm, and intelligent nature shook off
rapidly the clouds of ignorance and degradation in which it had been
bred; and catherine’s sincere commendations acted as a spur to his
industry. his brightening mind brightened his features, and added
spirit and nobility to their aspect: i could hardly fancy it the same
individual i had beheld on the day i discovered my little lady at
wuthering heights, after her expedition to the crags. while i admired
and they laboured, dusk drew on, and with it returned the master. he
came upon us quite unexpectedly, entering by the front way, and had a
full view of the whole three, ere we could raise our heads to glance at
him. well, i reflected, there was never a pleasanter, or more harmless
sight; and it will be a burning shame to scold them. the red fire-light
glowed on their two bonny heads, and revealed their faces animated with
the eager interest of children; for, though he was twenty-three and she
eighteen, each had so much of novelty to feel and learn, that neither
experienced nor evinced the sentiments of sober disenchanted maturity.

they lifted their eyes together, to encounter mr. heathcliff: perhaps
you have never remarked that their eyes are precisely similar, and they
are those of catherine earnshaw. the present catherine has no other
likeness to her, except a breadth of forehead, and a certain arch of
the nostril that makes her appear rather haughty, whether she will or
not. with hareton the resemblance is carried farther: it is singular at
all times, _then_ it was particularly striking; because his senses were
alert, and his mental faculties wakened to unwonted activity. i suppose
this resemblance disarmed mr. heathcliff: he walked to the hearth in
evident agitation; but it quickly subsided as he looked at the young
man: or, i should say, altered its character; for it was there yet. he
took the book from his hand, and glanced at the open page, then
returned it without any observation; merely signing catherine away: her
companion lingered very little behind her, and i was about to depart
also, but he bid me sit still.

“it is a poor conclusion, is it not?” he observed, having brooded
a while on the scene he had just witnessed: “an absurd termination to
my violent exertions? i get levers and mattocks to demolish the two
houses, and train myself to be capable of working like hercules, and
when everything is ready and in my power, i find the will to lift a
slate off either roof has vanished! my old enemies have not beaten me;
now would be the precise time to revenge myself on their
representatives: i could do it; and none could hinder me. but where is
the use? i don’t care for striking: i can’t take the trouble to raise
my hand! that sounds as if i had been labouring the whole time only to
exhibit a fine trait of magnanimity. it is far from being the case: i
have lost the faculty of enjoying their destruction, and i am too idle
to destroy for nothing.

“nelly, there is a strange change approaching; i’m in its shadow at
present. i take so little interest in my daily life that i hardly
remember to eat and drink. those two who have left the room are the
only objects which retain a distinct material appearance to me; and
that appearance causes me pain, amounting to agony. about _her_ i won’t
speak; and i don’t desire to think; but i earnestly wish she were
invisible: her presence invokes only maddening sensations. _he_ moves
me differently: and yet if i could do it without seeming insane, i’d
never see him again! you’ll perhaps think me rather inclined to become
so,” he added, making an effort to smile, “if i try to describe the
thousand forms of past associations and ideas he awakens or embodies.
but you’ll not talk of what i tell you; and my mind is so eternally
secluded in itself, it is tempting at last to turn it out to another.

“five minutes ago hareton seemed a personification of my youth, not a
human being; i felt to him in such a variety of ways, that it would
have been impossible to have accosted him rationally. in the first
place, his startling likeness to catherine connected him fearfully with
her. that, however, which you may suppose the most potent to arrest my
imagination, is actually the least: for what is not connected with her
to me? and what does not recall her? i cannot look down to this floor,
but her features are shaped in the flags! in every cloud, in every
tree—filling the air at night, and caught by glimpses in every object
by day—i am surrounded with her image! the most ordinary faces of men
and women—my own features—mock me with a resemblance. the entire world
is a dreadful collection of memoranda that she did exist, and that i
have lost her! well, hareton’s aspect was the ghost of my immortal
love; of my wild endeavours to hold my right; my degradation, my pride,
my happiness, and my anguish—

“but it is frenzy to repeat these thoughts to you: only it will let you
know why, with a reluctance to be always alone, his society is no
benefit; rather an aggravation of the constant torment i suffer: and it
partly contributes to render me regardless how he and his cousin go on
together. i can give them no attention any more.”

“but what do you mean by a _change_, mr. heathcliff?” i said, alarmed
at his manner: though he was neither in danger of losing his senses,
nor dying, according to my judgment: he was quite strong and healthy;
and, as to his reason, from childhood he had a delight in dwelling on
dark things, and entertaining odd fancies. he might have had a
monomania on the subject of his departed idol; but on every other point
his wits were as sound as mine.

“i shall not know that till it comes,” he said; “i’m only half
conscious of it now.”

“you have no feeling of illness, have you?” i asked.

“no, nelly, i have not,” he answered.

“then you are not afraid of death?” i pursued.

“afraid? no!” he replied. “i have neither a fear, nor a presentiment,
nor a hope of death. why should i? with my hard constitution and
temperate mode of living, and unperilous occupations, i ought to, and
probably _shall_, remain above ground till there is scarcely a black
hair on my head. and yet i cannot continue in this condition! i have to
remind myself to breathe—almost to remind my heart to beat! and it is
like bending back a stiff spring: it is by compulsion that i do the
slightest act not prompted by one thought; and by compulsion that i
notice anything alive or dead, which is not associated with one
universal idea. i have a single wish, and my whole being and faculties
are yearning to attain it. they have yearned towards it so long, and so
unwaveringly, that i’m convinced it _will_ be reached—and
_soon_—because it has devoured my existence: i am swallowed up in the
anticipation of its fulfilment. my confessions have not relieved me;
but they may account for some otherwise unaccountable phases of humour
which i show. o god! it is a long fight; i wish it were over!”

he began to pace the room, muttering terrible things to himself, till i
was inclined to believe, as he said joseph did, that conscience had
turned his heart to an earthly hell. i wondered greatly how it would
end. though he seldom before had revealed this state of mind, even by
looks, it was his habitual mood, i had no doubt: he asserted it
himself; but not a soul, from his general bearing, would have
conjectured the fact. you did not when you saw him, mr. lockwood: and
at the period of which i speak, he was just the same as then; only
fonder of continued solitude, and perhaps still more laconic in
company.




chapter xxxiv


for some days after that evening, mr. heathcliff shunned meeting us at
meals; yet he would not consent formally to exclude hareton and cathy.
he had an aversion to yielding so completely to his feelings, choosing
rather to absent himself; and eating once in twenty-four hours seemed
sufficient sustenance for him.

one night, after the family were in bed, i heard him go downstairs, and
out at the front door. i did not hear him re-enter, and in the morning
i found he was still away. we were in april then: the weather was sweet
and warm, the grass as green as showers and sun could make it, and the
two dwarf apple-trees near the southern wall in full bloom. after
breakfast, catherine insisted on my bringing a chair and sitting with
my work under the fir-trees at the end of the house; and she beguiled
hareton, who had perfectly recovered from his accident, to dig and
arrange her little garden, which was shifted to that corner by the
influence of joseph’s complaints. i was comfortably revelling in the
spring fragrance around, and the beautiful soft blue overhead, when my
young lady, who had run down near the gate to procure some primrose
roots for a border, returned only half laden, and informed us that mr.
heathcliff was coming in. “and he spoke to me,” she added, with a
perplexed countenance.

“what did he say?” asked hareton.

“he told me to begone as fast as i could,” she answered. “but he looked
so different from his usual look that i stopped a moment to stare at
him.”

“how?” he inquired.

“why, almost bright and cheerful. no, _almost_ nothing—_very much_
excited, and wild, and glad!” she replied.

“night-walking amuses him, then,” i remarked, affecting a careless
manner: in reality as surprised as she was, and anxious to ascertain
the truth of her statement; for to see the master looking glad would
not be an every-day spectacle. i framed an excuse to go in. heathcliff
stood at the open door; he was pale, and he trembled: yet, certainly,
he had a strange joyful glitter in his eyes, that altered the aspect of
his whole face.

“will you have some breakfast?” i said. “you must be hungry, rambling
about all night!” i wanted to discover where he had been, but i did not
like to ask directly.

“no, i’m not hungry,” he answered, averting his head, and speaking
rather contemptuously, as if he guessed i was trying to divine the
occasion of his good humour.

i felt perplexed: i didn’t know whether it were not a proper
opportunity to offer a bit of admonition.

“i don’t think it right to wander out of doors,” i observed, “instead
of being in bed: it is not wise, at any rate this moist season. i
daresay you’ll catch a bad cold, or a fever: you have something the
matter with you now!”

“nothing but what i can bear,” he replied; “and with the greatest
pleasure, provided you’ll leave me alone: get in, and don’t annoy me.”

i obeyed: and, in passing, i noticed he breathed as fast as a cat.

“yes!” i reflected to myself, “we shall have a fit of illness. i cannot
conceive what he has been doing.”

that noon he sat down to dinner with us, and received a heaped-up plate
from my hands, as if he intended to make amends for previous fasting.

“i’ve neither cold nor fever, nelly,” he remarked, in allusion to my
morning’s speech; “and i’m ready to do justice to the food you give
me.”

he took his knife and fork, and was going to commence eating, when the
inclination appeared to become suddenly extinct. he laid them on the
table, looked eagerly towards the window, then rose and went out. we
saw him walking to and fro in the garden while we concluded our meal,
and earnshaw said he’d go and ask why he would not dine: he thought we
had grieved him some way.

“well, is he coming?” cried catherine, when her cousin returned.

“nay,” he answered; “but he’s not angry: he seemed rarely pleased
indeed; only i made him impatient by speaking to him twice; and then he
bid me be off to you: he wondered how i could want the company of
anybody else.”

i set his plate to keep warm on the fender; and after an hour or two he
re-entered, when the room was clear, in no degree calmer: the same
unnatural—it was unnatural—appearance of joy under his black brows; the
same bloodless hue, and his teeth visible, now and then, in a kind of
smile; his frame shivering, not as one shivers with chill or weakness,
but as a tight-stretched cord vibrates—a strong thrilling, rather than
trembling.

i will ask what is the matter, i thought; or who should? and i
exclaimed—“have you heard any good news, mr. heathcliff? you look
uncommonly animated.”

“where should good news come from to me?” he said. “i’m animated with
hunger; and, seemingly, i must not eat.”

“your dinner is here,” i returned; “why won’t you get it?”

“i don’t want it now,” he muttered, hastily: “i’ll wait till supper.
and, nelly, once for all, let me beg you to warn hareton and the other
away from me. i wish to be troubled by nobody: i wish to have this
place to myself.”

“is there some new reason for this banishment?” i inquired. “tell me
why you are so queer, mr. heathcliff? where were you last night? i’m
not putting the question through idle curiosity, but—”

“you are putting the question through very idle curiosity,” he
interrupted, with a laugh. “yet i’ll answer it. last night i was on the
threshold of hell. to-day, i am within sight of my heaven. i have my
eyes on it: hardly three feet to sever me! and now you’d better go!
you’ll neither see nor hear anything to frighten you, if you refrain
from prying.”

having swept the hearth and wiped the table, i departed; more perplexed
than ever.

he did not quit the house again that afternoon, and no one intruded on
his solitude; till, at eight o’clock, i deemed it proper, though
unsummoned, to carry a candle and his supper to him. he was leaning
against the ledge of an open lattice, but not looking out: his face was
turned to the interior gloom. the fire had smouldered to ashes; the
room was filled with the damp, mild air of the cloudy evening; and so
still, that not only the murmur of the beck down gimmerton was
distinguishable, but its ripples and its gurgling over the pebbles, or
through the large stones which it could not cover. i uttered an
ejaculation of discontent at seeing the dismal grate, and commenced
shutting the casements, one after another, till i came to his.

“must i close this?” i asked, in order to rouse him; for he would not
stir.

the light flashed on his features as i spoke. oh, mr. lockwood, i
cannot express what a terrible start i got by the momentary view! those
deep black eyes! that smile, and ghastly paleness! it appeared to me,
not mr. heathcliff, but a goblin; and, in my terror, i let the candle
bend towards the wall, and it left me in darkness.

“yes, close it,” he replied, in his familiar voice. “there, that is
pure awkwardness! why did you hold the candle horizontally? be quick,
and bring another.”

i hurried out in a foolish state of dread, and said to joseph—“the
master wishes you to take him a light and rekindle the fire.” for i
dared not go in myself again just then.

joseph rattled some fire into the shovel, and went: but he brought it
back immediately, with the supper-tray in his other hand, explaining
that mr. heathcliff was going to bed, and he wanted nothing to eat till
morning. we heard him mount the stairs directly; he did not proceed to
his ordinary chamber, but turned into that with the panelled bed: its
window, as i mentioned before, is wide enough for anybody to get
through; and it struck me that he plotted another midnight excursion,
of which he had rather we had no suspicion.

“is he a ghoul or a vampire?” i mused. i had read of such hideous
incarnate demons. and then i set myself to reflect how i had tended him
in infancy, and watched him grow to youth, and followed him almost
through his whole course; and what absurd nonsense it was to yield to
that sense of horror. “but where did he come from, the little dark
thing, harboured by a good man to his bane?” muttered superstition, as
i dozed into unconsciousness. and i began, half dreaming, to weary
myself with imagining some fit parentage for him; and, repeating my
waking meditations, i tracked his existence over again, with grim
variations; at last, picturing his death and funeral: of which, all i
can remember is, being exceedingly vexed at having the task of
dictating an inscription for his monument, and consulting the sexton
about it; and, as he had no surname, and we could not tell his age, we
were obliged to content ourselves with the single word, “heathcliff.”
that came true: we were. if you enter the kirkyard, you’ll read, on his
headstone, only that, and the date of his death.

dawn restored me to common sense. i rose, and went into the garden, as
soon as i could see, to ascertain if there were any footmarks under his
window. there were none. “he has stayed at home,” i thought, “and he’ll
be all right to-day.” i prepared breakfast for the household, as was my
usual custom, but told hareton and catherine to get theirs ere the
master came down, for he lay late. they preferred taking it out of
doors, under the trees, and i set a little table to accommodate them.

on my re-entrance, i found mr. heathcliff below. he and joseph were
conversing about some farming business; he gave clear, minute
directions concerning the matter discussed, but he spoke rapidly, and
turned his head continually aside, and had the same excited expression,
even more exaggerated. when joseph quitted the room he took his seat in
the place he generally chose, and i put a basin of coffee before him.
he drew it nearer, and then rested his arms on the table, and looked at
the opposite wall, as i supposed, surveying one particular portion, up
and down, with glittering, restless eyes, and with such eager interest
that he stopped breathing during half a minute together.

“come now,” i exclaimed, pushing some bread against his hand, “eat and
drink that, while it is hot: it has been waiting near an hour.”

he didn’t notice me, and yet he smiled. i’d rather have seen him gnash
his teeth than smile so.

“mr. heathcliff! master!” i cried, “don’t, for god’s sake, stare as if
you saw an unearthly vision.”

“don’t, for god’s sake, shout so loud,” he replied. “turn round, and
tell me, are we by ourselves?”

“of course,” was my answer; “of course we are.”

still, i involuntarily obeyed him, as if i was not quite sure. with a
sweep of his hand he cleared a vacant space in front among the
breakfast things, and leant forward to gaze more at his ease.

now, i perceived he was not looking at the wall; for when i regarded
him alone, it seemed exactly that he gazed at something within two
yards’ distance. and whatever it was, it communicated, apparently, both
pleasure and pain in exquisite extremes: at least the anguished, yet
raptured, expression of his countenance suggested that idea. the
fancied object was not fixed, either: his eyes pursued it with
unwearied diligence, and, even in speaking to me, were never weaned
away. i vainly reminded him of his protracted abstinence from food: if
he stirred to touch anything in compliance with my entreaties, if he
stretched his hand out to get a piece of bread, his fingers clenched
before they reached it, and remained on the table, forgetful of their
aim.

i sat, a model of patience, trying to attract his absorbed attention
from its engrossing speculation; till he grew irritable, and got up,
asking why i would not allow him to have his own time in taking his
meals? and saying that on the next occasion i needn’t wait: i might set
the things down and go. having uttered these words he left the house,
slowly sauntered down the garden path, and disappeared through the
gate.

the hours crept anxiously by: another evening came. i did not retire to
rest till late, and when i did, i could not sleep. he returned after
midnight, and, instead of going to bed, shut himself into the room
beneath. i listened, and tossed about, and, finally, dressed and
descended. it was too irksome to lie there, harassing my brain with a
hundred idle misgivings.

i distinguished mr. heathcliff’s step, restlessly measuring the floor,
and he frequently broke the silence by a deep inspiration, resembling a
groan. he muttered detached words also; the only one i could catch was
the name of catherine, coupled with some wild term of endearment or
suffering; and spoken as one would speak to a person present; low and
earnest, and wrung from the depth of his soul. i had not courage to
walk straight into the apartment; but i desired to divert him from his
reverie, and therefore fell foul of the kitchen fire, stirred it, and
began to scrape the cinders. it drew him forth sooner than i expected.
he opened the door immediately, and said—“nelly, come here—is it
morning? come in with your light.”

“it is striking four,” i answered. “you want a candle to take upstairs:
you might have lit one at this fire.”

“no, i don’t wish to go upstairs,” he said. “come in, and kindle _me_ a
fire, and do anything there is to do about the room.”

“i must blow the coals red first, before i can carry any,” i replied,
getting a chair and the bellows.

he roamed to and fro, meantime, in a state approaching distraction; his
heavy sighs succeeding each other so thick as to leave no space for
common breathing between.

“when day breaks i’ll send for green,” he said; “i wish to make some
legal inquiries of him while i can bestow a thought on those matters,
and while i can act calmly. i have not written my will yet; and how to
leave my property i cannot determine. i wish i could annihilate it from
the face of the earth.”

“i would not talk so, mr. heathcliff,” i interposed. “let your will be
a while: you’ll be spared to repent of your many injustices yet! i
never expected that your nerves would be disordered: they are, at
present, marvellously so, however; and almost entirely through your own
fault. the way you’ve passed these three last days might knock up a
titan. do take some food, and some repose. you need only look at
yourself in a glass to see how you require both. your cheeks are
hollow, and your eyes blood-shot, like a person starving with hunger
and going blind with loss of sleep.”

“it is not my fault that i cannot eat or rest,” he replied. “i assure
you it is through no settled designs. i’ll do both, as soon as i
possibly can. but you might as well bid a man struggling in the water
rest within arms’ length of the shore! i must reach it first, and then
i’ll rest. well, never mind mr. green: as to repenting of my
injustices, i’ve done no injustice, and i repent of nothing. i’m too
happy; and yet i’m not happy enough. my soul’s bliss kills my body, but
does not satisfy itself.”

“happy, master?” i cried. “strange happiness! if you would hear me
without being angry, i might offer some advice that would make you
happier.”

“what is that?” he asked. “give it.”

“you are aware, mr. heathcliff,” i said, “that from the time you were
thirteen years old you have lived a selfish, unchristian life; and
probably hardly had a bible in your hands during all that period. you
must have forgotten the contents of the book, and you may not have
space to search it now. could it be hurtful to send for some one—some
minister of any denomination, it does not matter which—to explain it,
and show you how very far you have erred from its precepts; and how
unfit you will be for its heaven, unless a change takes place before
you die?”

“i’m rather obliged than angry, nelly,” he said, “for you remind me of
the manner in which i desire to be buried. it is to be carried to the
churchyard in the evening. you and hareton may, if you please,
accompany me: and mind, particularly, to notice that the sexton obeys
my directions concerning the two coffins! no minister need come; nor
need anything be said over me.—i tell you i have nearly attained _my_
heaven; and that of others is altogether unvalued and uncoveted by me.”

“and supposing you persevered in your obstinate fast, and died by that
means, and they refused to bury you in the precincts of the kirk?” i
said, shocked at his godless indifference. “how would you like it?”

“they won’t do that,” he replied: “if they did, you must have me
removed secretly; and if you neglect it you shall prove, practically,
that the dead are not annihilated!”

as soon as he heard the other members of the family stirring he retired
to his den, and i breathed freer. but in the afternoon, while joseph
and hareton were at their work, he came into the kitchen again, and,
with a wild look, bid me come and sit in the house: he wanted somebody
with him. i declined; telling him plainly that his strange talk and
manner frightened me, and i had neither the nerve nor the will to be
his companion alone.

“i believe you think me a fiend,” he said, with his dismal laugh:
“something too horrible to live under a decent roof.” then turning to
catherine, who was there, and who drew behind me at his approach, he
added, half sneeringly,—“will _you_ come, chuck? i’ll not hurt you. no!
to you i’ve made myself worse than the devil. well, there is _one_ who
won’t shrink from my company! by god! she’s relentless. oh, damn it!
it’s unutterably too much for flesh and blood to bear—even mine.”

he solicited the society of no one more. at dusk he went into his
chamber. through the whole night, and far into the morning, we heard
him groaning and murmuring to himself. hareton was anxious to enter;
but i bid him fetch mr. kenneth, and he should go in and see him. when
he came, and i requested admittance and tried to open the door, i found
it locked; and heathcliff bid us be damned. he was better, and would be
left alone; so the doctor went away.

the following evening was very wet: indeed, it poured down till
day-dawn; and, as i took my morning walk round the house, i observed
the master’s window swinging open, and the rain driving straight in. he
cannot be in bed, i thought: those showers would drench him through. he
must either be up or out. but i’ll make no more ado, i’ll go boldly and
look.

having succeeded in obtaining entrance with another key, i ran to
unclose the panels, for the chamber was vacant; quickly pushing them
aside, i peeped in. mr. heathcliff was there—laid on his back. his eyes
met mine so keen and fierce, i started; and then he seemed to smile. i
could not think him dead: but his face and throat were washed with
rain; the bed-clothes dripped, and he was perfectly still. the lattice,
flapping to and fro, had grazed one hand that rested on the sill; no
blood trickled from the broken skin, and when i put my fingers to it, i
could doubt no more: he was dead and stark!

i hasped the window; i combed his black long hair from his forehead; i
tried to close his eyes: to extinguish, if possible, that frightful,
life-like gaze of exultation before any one else beheld it. they would
not shut: they seemed to sneer at my attempts; and his parted lips and
sharp white teeth sneered too! taken with another fit of cowardice, i
cried out for joseph. joseph shuffled up and made a noise, but
resolutely refused to meddle with him.

“th’ divil’s harried off his soul,” he cried, “and he may hev’ his
carcass into t’ bargin, for aught i care! ech! what a wicked ’un he
looks, girning at death!” and the old sinner grinned in mockery. i
thought he intended to cut a caper round the bed; but suddenly
composing himself, he fell on his knees, and raised his hands, and
returned thanks that the lawful master and the ancient stock were
restored to their rights.

i felt stunned by the awful event; and my memory unavoidably recurred
to former times with a sort of oppressive sadness. but poor hareton,
the most wronged, was the only one who really suffered much. he sat by
the corpse all night, weeping in bitter earnest. he pressed its hand,
and kissed the sarcastic, savage face that every one else shrank from
contemplating; and bemoaned him with that strong grief which springs
naturally from a generous heart, though it be tough as tempered steel.

mr. kenneth was perplexed to pronounce of what disorder the master
died. i concealed the fact of his having swallowed nothing for four
days, fearing it might lead to trouble, and then, i am persuaded, he
did not abstain on purpose: it was the consequence of his strange
illness, not the cause.

we buried him, to the scandal of the whole neighbourhood, as he wished.
earnshaw and i, the sexton, and six men to carry the coffin,
comprehended the whole attendance. the six men departed when they had
let it down into the grave: we stayed to see it covered. hareton, with
a streaming face, dug green sods, and laid them over the brown mould
himself: at present it is as smooth and verdant as its companion
mounds—and i hope its tenant sleeps as soundly. but the country folks,
if you ask them, would swear on the bible that he _walks_: there are
those who speak to having met him near the church, and on the moor, and
even within this house. idle tales, you’ll say, and so say i. yet that
old man by the kitchen fire affirms he has seen two on ’em looking out
of his chamber window on every rainy night since his death:—and an odd
thing happened to me about a month ago. i was going to the grange one
evening—a dark evening, threatening thunder—and, just at the turn of
the heights, i encountered a little boy with a sheep and two lambs
before him; he was crying terribly; and i supposed the lambs were
skittish, and would not be guided.

“what is the matter, my little man?” i asked.

“there’s heathcliff and a woman yonder, under t’ nab,” he blubbered,
“un’ i darnut pass ’em.”

i saw nothing; but neither the sheep nor he would go on, so i bid him
take the road lower down. he probably raised the phantoms from
thinking, as he traversed the moors alone, on the nonsense he had heard
his parents and companions repeat. yet, still, i don’t like being out
in the dark now; and i don’t like being left by myself in this grim
house: i cannot help it; i shall be glad when they leave it, and shift
to the grange.

“they are going to the grange, then?” i said.

“yes,” answered mrs. dean, “as soon as they are married, and that will
be on new year’s day.”

“and who will live here then?”

“why, joseph will take care of the house, and, perhaps, a lad to keep
him company. they will live in the kitchen, and the rest will be shut
up.”

“for the use of such ghosts as choose to inhabit it?” i observed.

“no, mr. lockwood,” said nelly, shaking her head. “i believe the dead
are at peace: but it is not right to speak of them with levity.”

at that moment the garden gate swung to; the ramblers were returning.

“_they_ are afraid of nothing,” i grumbled, watching their approach
through the window. “together, they would brave satan and all his
legions.”

as they stepped on to the door-stones, and halted to take a last look
at the moon—or, more correctly, at each other by her light—i felt
irresistibly impelled to escape them again; and, pressing a remembrance
into the hand of mrs. dean, and disregarding her expostulations at my
rudeness, i vanished through the kitchen as they opened the house-door;
and so should have confirmed joseph in his opinion of his
fellow-servant’s gay indiscretions, had he not fortunately recognised
me for a respectable character by the sweet ring of a sovereign at his
feet.

my walk home was lengthened by a diversion in the direction of the
kirk. when beneath its walls, i perceived decay had made progress, even
in seven months: many a window showed black gaps deprived of glass; and
slates jutted off, here and there, beyond the right line of the roof,
to be gradually worked off in coming autumn storms.

i sought, and soon discovered, the three headstones on the slope next
the moor: the middle one grey, and half buried in heath; edgar linton’s
only harmonized by the turf and moss creeping up its foot; heathcliff’s
still bare.

i lingered round them, under that benign sky: watched the moths
fluttering among the heath and harebells, listened to the soft wind
breathing through the grass, and wondered how any one could ever
imagine unquiet slumbers for the sleepers in that quiet earth.






chapter i. jonathan harker’s journal
chapter ii. jonathan harker’s journal
chapter iii. jonathan harker’s journal
chapter iv. jonathan harker’s journal
chapter v. letters—lucy and mina
chapter vi. mina murray’s journal
chapter vii. cutting from “the dailygraph,” 8 august
chapter viii. mina murray’s journal
chapter ix. mina murray’s journal
chapter x. mina murray’s journal
chapter xi. lucy westenra’s diary
chapter xii. dr. seward’s diary
chapter xiii. dr. seward’s diary
chapter xiv. mina harker’s journal
chapter xv. dr. seward’s diary
chapter xvi. dr. seward’s diary
chapter xvii. dr. seward’s diary
chapter xviii. dr. seward’s diary
chapter xix. jonathan harker’s journal
chapter xx. jonathan harker’s journal
chapter xxi. dr. seward’s diary
chapter xxii. jonathan harker’s journal
chapter xxiii. dr. seward’s diary
chapter xxiv. dr. seward’s phonograph diary, spoken by van helsing
chapter xxv. dr. seward’s diary
chapter xxvi. dr. seward’s diary
chapter xxvii. mina harker’s journal




how these papers have been placed in sequence will be made manifest in
the reading of them. all needless matters have been eliminated, so that
a history almost at variance with the possibilities of later-day belief
may stand forth as simple fact. there is throughout no statement of
past things wherein memory may err, for all the records chosen are
exactly contemporary, given from the standpoints and within the range
of knowledge of those who made them.




dracula




chapter i

jonathan harker’s journal

(_kept in shorthand._)


_3 may. bistritz._--left munich at 8:35 p. m., on 1st may, arriving at
vienna early next morning; should have arrived at 6:46, but train was an
hour late. buda-pesth seems a wonderful place, from the glimpse which i
got of it from the train and the little i could walk through the
streets. i feared to go very far from the station, as we had arrived
late and would start as near the correct time as possible. the
impression i had was that we were leaving the west and entering the
east; the most western of splendid bridges over the danube, which is
here of noble width and depth, took us among the traditions of turkish
rule.

we left in pretty good time, and came after nightfall to klausenburgh.
here i stopped for the night at the hotel royale. i had for dinner, or
rather supper, a chicken done up some way with red pepper, which was
very good but thirsty. (_mem._, get recipe for mina.) i asked the
waiter, and he said it was called “paprika hendl,” and that, as it was a
national dish, i should be able to get it anywhere along the
carpathians. i found my smattering of german very useful here; indeed, i
don’t know how i should be able to get on without it.

having had some time at my disposal when in london, i had visited the
british museum, and made search among the books and maps in the library
regarding transylvania; it had struck me that some foreknowledge of the
country could hardly fail to have some importance in dealing with a
nobleman of that country. i find that the district he named is in the
extreme east of the country, just on the borders of three states,
transylvania, moldavia and bukovina, in the midst of the carpathian
mountains; one of the wildest and least known portions of europe. i was
not able to light on any map or work giving the exact locality of the
castle dracula, as there are no maps of this country as yet to compare
with our own ordnance survey maps; but i found that bistritz, the post
town named by count dracula, is a fairly well-known place. i shall enter
here some of my notes, as they may refresh my memory when i talk over my
travels with mina.

in the population of transylvania there are four distinct nationalities:
saxons in the south, and mixed with them the wallachs, who are the
descendants of the dacians; magyars in the west, and szekelys in the
east and north. i am going among the latter, who claim to be descended
from attila and the huns. this may be so, for when the magyars conquered
the country in the eleventh century they found the huns settled in it. i
read that every known superstition in the world is gathered into the
horseshoe of the carpathians, as if it were the centre of some sort of
imaginative whirlpool; if so my stay may be very interesting. (_mem._, i
must ask the count all about them.)

i did not sleep well, though my bed was comfortable enough, for i had
all sorts of queer dreams. there was a dog howling all night under my
window, which may have had something to do with it; or it may have been
the paprika, for i had to drink up all the water in my carafe, and was
still thirsty. towards morning i slept and was wakened by the continuous
knocking at my door, so i guess i must have been sleeping soundly then.
i had for breakfast more paprika, and a sort of porridge of maize flour
which they said was “mamaliga,” and egg-plant stuffed with forcemeat, a
very excellent dish, which they call “impletata.” (_mem._, get recipe
for this also.) i had to hurry breakfast, for the train started a little
before eight, or rather it ought to have done so, for after rushing to
the station at 7:30 i had to sit in the carriage for more than an hour
before we began to move. it seems to me that the further east you go the
more unpunctual are the trains. what ought they to be in china?

all day long we seemed to dawdle through a country which was full of
beauty of every kind. sometimes we saw little towns or castles on the
top of steep hills such as we see in old missals; sometimes we ran by
rivers and streams which seemed from the wide stony margin on each side
of them to be subject to great floods. it takes a lot of water, and
running strong, to sweep the outside edge of a river clear. at every
station there were groups of people, sometimes crowds, and in all sorts
of attire. some of them were just like the peasants at home or those i
saw coming through france and germany, with short jackets and round hats
and home-made trousers; but others were very picturesque. the women
looked pretty, except when you got near them, but they were very clumsy
about the waist. they had all full white sleeves of some kind or other,
and most of them had big belts with a lot of strips of something
fluttering from them like the dresses in a ballet, but of course there
were petticoats under them. the strangest figures we saw were the
slovaks, who were more barbarian than the rest, with their big cow-boy
hats, great baggy dirty-white trousers, white linen shirts, and enormous
heavy leather belts, nearly a foot wide, all studded over with brass
nails. they wore high boots, with their trousers tucked into them, and
had long black hair and heavy black moustaches. they are very
picturesque, but do not look prepossessing. on the stage they would be
set down at once as some old oriental band of brigands. they are,
however, i am told, very harmless and rather wanting in natural
self-assertion.

it was on the dark side of twilight when we got to bistritz, which is a
very interesting old place. being practically on the frontier--for the
borgo pass leads from it into bukovina--it has had a very stormy
existence, and it certainly shows marks of it. fifty years ago a series
of great fires took place, which made terrible havoc on five separate
occasions. at the very beginning of the seventeenth century it underwent
a siege of three weeks and lost 13,000 people, the casualties of war
proper being assisted by famine and disease.

count dracula had directed me to go to the golden krone hotel, which i
found, to my great delight, to be thoroughly old-fashioned, for of
course i wanted to see all i could of the ways of the country. i was
evidently expected, for when i got near the door i faced a
cheery-looking elderly woman in the usual peasant dress--white
undergarment with long double apron, front, and back, of coloured stuff
fitting almost too tight for modesty. when i came close she bowed and
said, “the herr englishman?” “yes,” i said, “jonathan harker.” she
smiled, and gave some message to an elderly man in white shirt-sleeves,
who had followed her to the door. he went, but immediately returned with
a letter:--

     “my friend.--welcome to the carpathians. i am anxiously expecting
     you. sleep well to-night. at three to-morrow the diligence will
     start for bukovina; a place on it is kept for you. at the borgo
     pass my carriage will await you and will bring you to me. i trust
     that your journey from london has been a happy one, and that you
     will enjoy your stay in my beautiful land.

“your friend,

“dracula.”


_4 may._--i found that my landlord had got a letter from the count,
directing him to secure the best place on the coach for me; but on
making inquiries as to details he seemed somewhat reticent, and
pretended that he could not understand my german. this could not be
true, because up to then he had understood it perfectly; at least, he
answered my questions exactly as if he did. he and his wife, the old
lady who had received me, looked at each other in a frightened sort of
way. he mumbled out that the money had been sent in a letter, and that
was all he knew. when i asked him if he knew count dracula, and could
tell me anything of his castle, both he and his wife crossed themselves,
and, saying that they knew nothing at all, simply refused to speak
further. it was so near the time of starting that i had no time to ask
any one else, for it was all very mysterious and not by any means
comforting.

just before i was leaving, the old lady came up to my room and said in a
very hysterical way:

“must you go? oh! young herr, must you go?” she was in such an excited
state that she seemed to have lost her grip of what german she knew, and
mixed it all up with some other language which i did not know at all. i
was just able to follow her by asking many questions. when i told her
that i must go at once, and that i was engaged on important business,
she asked again:

“do you know what day it is?” i answered that it was the fourth of may.
she shook her head as she said again:

“oh, yes! i know that! i know that, but do you know what day it is?” on
my saying that i did not understand, she went on:

“it is the eve of st. george’s day. do you not know that to-night, when
the clock strikes midnight, all the evil things in the world will have
full sway? do you know where you are going, and what you are going to?”
she was in such evident distress that i tried to comfort her, but
without effect. finally she went down on her knees and implored me not
to go; at least to wait a day or two before starting. it was all very
ridiculous but i did not feel comfortable. however, there was business
to be done, and i could allow nothing to interfere with it. i therefore
tried to raise her up, and said, as gravely as i could, that i thanked
her, but my duty was imperative, and that i must go. she then rose and
dried her eyes, and taking a crucifix from her neck offered it to me. i
did not know what to do, for, as an english churchman, i have been
taught to regard such things as in some measure idolatrous, and yet it
seemed so ungracious to refuse an old lady meaning so well and in such a
state of mind. she saw, i suppose, the doubt in my face, for she put the
rosary round my neck, and said, “for your mother’s sake,” and went out
of the room. i am writing up this part of the diary whilst i am waiting
for the coach, which is, of course, late; and the crucifix is still
round my neck. whether it is the old lady’s fear, or the many ghostly
traditions of this place, or the crucifix itself, i do not know, but i
am not feeling nearly as easy in my mind as usual. if this book should
ever reach mina before i do, let it bring my good-bye. here comes the
coach!

       *       *       *       *       *

_5 may. the castle._--the grey of the morning has passed, and the sun is
high over the distant horizon, which seems jagged, whether with trees or
hills i know not, for it is so far off that big things and little are
mixed. i am not sleepy, and, as i am not to be called till i awake,
naturally i write till sleep comes. there are many odd things to put
down, and, lest who reads them may fancy that i dined too well before i
left bistritz, let me put down my dinner exactly. i dined on what they
called “robber steak”--bits of bacon, onion, and beef, seasoned with red
pepper, and strung on sticks and roasted over the fire, in the simple
style of the london cat’s meat! the wine was golden mediasch, which
produces a queer sting on the tongue, which is, however, not
disagreeable. i had only a couple of glasses of this, and nothing else.

when i got on the coach the driver had not taken his seat, and i saw him
talking with the landlady. they were evidently talking of me, for every
now and then they looked at me, and some of the people who were sitting
on the bench outside the door--which they call by a name meaning
“word-bearer”--came and listened, and then looked at me, most of them
pityingly. i could hear a lot of words often repeated, queer words, for
there were many nationalities in the crowd; so i quietly got my polyglot
dictionary from my bag and looked them out. i must say they were not
cheering to me, for amongst them were “ordog”--satan, “pokol”--hell,
“stregoica”--witch, “vrolok” and “vlkoslak”--both of which mean the same
thing, one being slovak and the other servian for something that is
either were-wolf or vampire. (_mem._, i must ask the count about these
superstitions)

when we started, the crowd round the inn door, which had by this time
swelled to a considerable size, all made the sign of the cross and
pointed two fingers towards me. with some difficulty i got a
fellow-passenger to tell me what they meant; he would not answer at
first, but on learning that i was english, he explained that it was a
charm or guard against the evil eye. this was not very pleasant for me,
just starting for an unknown place to meet an unknown man; but every one
seemed so kind-hearted, and so sorrowful, and so sympathetic that i
could not but be touched. i shall never forget the last glimpse which i
had of the inn-yard and its crowd of picturesque figures, all crossing
themselves, as they stood round the wide archway, with its background of
rich foliage of oleander and orange trees in green tubs clustered in the
centre of the yard. then our driver, whose wide linen drawers covered
the whole front of the box-seat--“gotza” they call them--cracked his big
whip over his four small horses, which ran abreast, and we set off on
our journey.

i soon lost sight and recollection of ghostly fears in the beauty of the
scene as we drove along, although had i known the language, or rather
languages, which my fellow-passengers were speaking, i might not have
been able to throw them off so easily. before us lay a green sloping
land full of forests and woods, with here and there steep hills, crowned
with clumps of trees or with farmhouses, the blank gable end to the
road. there was everywhere a bewildering mass of fruit blossom--apple,
plum, pear, cherry; and as we drove by i could see the green grass under
the trees spangled with the fallen petals. in and out amongst these
green hills of what they call here the “mittel land” ran the road,
losing itself as it swept round the grassy curve, or was shut out by the
straggling ends of pine woods, which here and there ran down the
hillsides like tongues of flame. the road was rugged, but still we
seemed to fly over it with a feverish haste. i could not understand then
what the haste meant, but the driver was evidently bent on losing no
time in reaching borgo prund. i was told that this road is in summertime
excellent, but that it had not yet been put in order after the winter
snows. in this respect it is different from the general run of roads in
the carpathians, for it is an old tradition that they are not to be kept
in too good order. of old the hospadars would not repair them, lest the
turk should think that they were preparing to bring in foreign troops,
and so hasten the war which was always really at loading point.

beyond the green swelling hills of the mittel land rose mighty slopes
of forest up to the lofty steeps of the carpathians themselves. right
and left of us they towered, with the afternoon sun falling full upon
them and bringing out all the glorious colours of this beautiful range,
deep blue and purple in the shadows of the peaks, green and brown where
grass and rock mingled, and an endless perspective of jagged rock and
pointed crags, till these were themselves lost in the distance, where
the snowy peaks rose grandly. here and there seemed mighty rifts in the
mountains, through which, as the sun began to sink, we saw now and again
the white gleam of falling water. one of my companions touched my arm as
we swept round the base of a hill and opened up the lofty, snow-covered
peak of a mountain, which seemed, as we wound on our serpentine way, to
be right before us:--

“look! isten szek!”--“god’s seat!”--and he crossed himself reverently.

as we wound on our endless way, and the sun sank lower and lower behind
us, the shadows of the evening began to creep round us. this was
emphasised by the fact that the snowy mountain-top still held the
sunset, and seemed to glow out with a delicate cool pink. here and there
we passed cszeks and slovaks, all in picturesque attire, but i noticed
that goitre was painfully prevalent. by the roadside were many crosses,
and as we swept by, my companions all crossed themselves. here and there
was a peasant man or woman kneeling before a shrine, who did not even
turn round as we approached, but seemed in the self-surrender of
devotion to have neither eyes nor ears for the outer world. there were
many things new to me: for instance, hay-ricks in the trees, and here
and there very beautiful masses of weeping birch, their white stems
shining like silver through the delicate green of the leaves. now and
again we passed a leiter-wagon--the ordinary peasant’s cart--with its
long, snake-like vertebra, calculated to suit the inequalities of the
road. on this were sure to be seated quite a group of home-coming
peasants, the cszeks with their white, and the slovaks with their
coloured, sheepskins, the latter carrying lance-fashion their long
staves, with axe at end. as the evening fell it began to get very cold,
and the growing twilight seemed to merge into one dark mistiness the
gloom of the trees, oak, beech, and pine, though in the valleys which
ran deep between the spurs of the hills, as we ascended through the
pass, the dark firs stood out here and there against the background of
late-lying snow. sometimes, as the road was cut through the pine woods
that seemed in the darkness to be closing down upon us, great masses of
greyness, which here and there bestrewed the trees, produced a
peculiarly weird and solemn effect, which carried on the thoughts and
grim fancies engendered earlier in the evening, when the falling sunset
threw into strange relief the ghost-like clouds which amongst the
carpathians seem to wind ceaselessly through the valleys. sometimes the
hills were so steep that, despite our driver’s haste, the horses could
only go slowly. i wished to get down and walk up them, as we do at home,
but the driver would not hear of it. “no, no,” he said; “you must not
walk here; the dogs are too fierce”; and then he added, with what he
evidently meant for grim pleasantry--for he looked round to catch the
approving smile of the rest--“and you may have enough of such matters
before you go to sleep.” the only stop he would make was a moment’s
pause to light his lamps.

when it grew dark there seemed to be some excitement amongst the
passengers, and they kept speaking to him, one after the other, as
though urging him to further speed. he lashed the horses unmercifully
with his long whip, and with wild cries of encouragement urged them on
to further exertions. then through the darkness i could see a sort of
patch of grey light ahead of us, as though there were a cleft in the
hills. the excitement of the passengers grew greater; the crazy coach
rocked on its great leather springs, and swayed like a boat tossed on a
stormy sea. i had to hold on. the road grew more level, and we appeared
to fly along. then the mountains seemed to come nearer to us on each
side and to frown down upon us; we were entering on the borgo pass. one
by one several of the passengers offered me gifts, which they pressed
upon me with an earnestness which would take no denial; these were
certainly of an odd and varied kind, but each was given in simple good
faith, with a kindly word, and a blessing, and that strange mixture of
fear-meaning movements which i had seen outside the hotel at
bistritz--the sign of the cross and the guard against the evil eye.
then, as we flew along, the driver leaned forward, and on each side the
passengers, craning over the edge of the coach, peered eagerly into the
darkness. it was evident that something very exciting was either
happening or expected, but though i asked each passenger, no one would
give me the slightest explanation. this state of excitement kept on for
some little time; and at last we saw before us the pass opening out on
the eastern side. there were dark, rolling clouds overhead, and in the
air the heavy, oppressive sense of thunder. it seemed as though the
mountain range had separated two atmospheres, and that now we had got
into the thunderous one. i was now myself looking out for the conveyance
which was to take me to the count. each moment i expected to see the
glare of lamps through the blackness; but all was dark. the only light
was the flickering rays of our own lamps, in which the steam from our
hard-driven horses rose in a white cloud. we could see now the sandy
road lying white before us, but there was on it no sign of a vehicle.
the passengers drew back with a sigh of gladness, which seemed to mock
my own disappointment. i was already thinking what i had best do, when
the driver, looking at his watch, said to the others something which i
could hardly hear, it was spoken so quietly and in so low a tone; i
thought it was “an hour less than the time.” then turning to me, he said
in german worse than my own:--

“there is no carriage here. the herr is not expected after all. he will
now come on to bukovina, and return to-morrow or the next day; better
the next day.” whilst he was speaking the horses began to neigh and
snort and plunge wildly, so that the driver had to hold them up. then,
amongst a chorus of screams from the peasants and a universal crossing
of themselves, a calèche, with four horses, drove up behind us, overtook
us, and drew up beside the coach. i could see from the flash of our
lamps, as the rays fell on them, that the horses were coal-black and
splendid animals. they were driven by a tall man, with a long brown
beard and a great black hat, which seemed to hide his face from us. i
could only see the gleam of a pair of very bright eyes, which seemed red
in the lamplight, as he turned to us. he said to the driver:--

“you are early to-night, my friend.” the man stammered in reply:--

“the english herr was in a hurry,” to which the stranger replied:--

“that is why, i suppose, you wished him to go on to bukovina. you cannot
deceive me, my friend; i know too much, and my horses are swift.” as he
spoke he smiled, and the lamplight fell on a hard-looking mouth, with
very red lips and sharp-looking teeth, as white as ivory. one of my
companions whispered to another the line from burger’s “lenore”:--

    “denn die todten reiten schnell”--
    (“for the dead travel fast.”)

the strange driver evidently heard the words, for he looked up with a
gleaming smile. the passenger turned his face away, at the same time
putting out his two fingers and crossing himself. “give me the herr’s
luggage,” said the driver; and with exceeding alacrity my bags were
handed out and put in the calèche. then i descended from the side of the
coach, as the calèche was close alongside, the driver helping me with a
hand which caught my arm in a grip of steel; his strength must have been
prodigious. without a word he shook his reins, the horses turned, and we
swept into the darkness of the pass. as i looked back i saw the steam
from the horses of the coach by the light of the lamps, and projected
against it the figures of my late companions crossing themselves. then
the driver cracked his whip and called to his horses, and off they swept
on their way to bukovina. as they sank into the darkness i felt a
strange chill, and a lonely feeling came over me; but a cloak was thrown
over my shoulders, and a rug across my knees, and the driver said in
excellent german:--

“the night is chill, mein herr, and my master the count bade me take all
care of you. there is a flask of slivovitz (the plum brandy of the
country) underneath the seat, if you should require it.” i did not take
any, but it was a comfort to know it was there all the same. i felt a
little strangely, and not a little frightened. i think had there been
any alternative i should have taken it, instead of prosecuting that
unknown night journey. the carriage went at a hard pace straight along,
then we made a complete turn and went along another straight road. it
seemed to me that we were simply going over and over the same ground
again; and so i took note of some salient point, and found that this was
so. i would have liked to have asked the driver what this all meant, but
i really feared to do so, for i thought that, placed as i was, any
protest would have had no effect in case there had been an intention to
delay. by-and-by, however, as i was curious to know how time was
passing, i struck a match, and by its flame looked at my watch; it was
within a few minutes of midnight. this gave me a sort of shock, for i
suppose the general superstition about midnight was increased by my
recent experiences. i waited with a sick feeling of suspense.

then a dog began to howl somewhere in a farmhouse far down the road--a
long, agonised wailing, as if from fear. the sound was taken up by
another dog, and then another and another, till, borne on the wind which
now sighed softly through the pass, a wild howling began, which seemed
to come from all over the country, as far as the imagination could grasp
it through the gloom of the night. at the first howl the horses began to
strain and rear, but the driver spoke to them soothingly, and they
quieted down, but shivered and sweated as though after a runaway from
sudden fright. then, far off in the distance, from the mountains on each
side of us began a louder and a sharper howling--that of wolves--which
affected both the horses and myself in the same way--for i was minded to
jump from the calèche and run, whilst they reared again and plunged
madly, so that the driver had to use all his great strength to keep them
from bolting. in a few minutes, however, my own ears got accustomed to
the sound, and the horses so far became quiet that the driver was able
to descend and to stand before them. he petted and soothed them, and
whispered something in their ears, as i have heard of horse-tamers
doing, and with extraordinary effect, for under his caresses they became
quite manageable again, though they still trembled. the driver again
took his seat, and shaking his reins, started off at a great pace. this
time, after going to the far side of the pass, he suddenly turned down a
narrow roadway which ran sharply to the right.

soon we were hemmed in with trees, which in places arched right over the
roadway till we passed as through a tunnel; and again great frowning
rocks guarded us boldly on either side. though we were in shelter, we
could hear the rising wind, for it moaned and whistled through the
rocks, and the branches of the trees crashed together as we swept along.
it grew colder and colder still, and fine, powdery snow began to fall,
so that soon we and all around us were covered with a white blanket. the
keen wind still carried the howling of the dogs, though this grew
fainter as we went on our way. the baying of the wolves sounded nearer
and nearer, as though they were closing round on us from every side. i
grew dreadfully afraid, and the horses shared my fear. the driver,
however, was not in the least disturbed; he kept turning his head to
left and right, but i could not see anything through the darkness.

suddenly, away on our left, i saw a faint flickering blue flame. the
driver saw it at the same moment; he at once checked the horses, and,
jumping to the ground, disappeared into the darkness. i did not know
what to do, the less as the howling of the wolves grew closer; but while
i wondered the driver suddenly appeared again, and without a word took
his seat, and we resumed our journey. i think i must have fallen asleep
and kept dreaming of the incident, for it seemed to be repeated
endlessly, and now looking back, it is like a sort of awful nightmare.
once the flame appeared so near the road, that even in the darkness
around us i could watch the driver’s motions. he went rapidly to where
the blue flame arose--it must have been very faint, for it did not seem
to illumine the place around it at all--and gathering a few stones,
formed them into some device. once there appeared a strange optical
effect: when he stood between me and the flame he did not obstruct it,
for i could see its ghostly flicker all the same. this startled me, but
as the effect was only momentary, i took it that my eyes deceived me
straining through the darkness. then for a time there were no blue
flames, and we sped onwards through the gloom, with the howling of the
wolves around us, as though they were following in a moving circle.

at last there came a time when the driver went further afield than he
had yet gone, and during his absence, the horses began to tremble worse
than ever and to snort and scream with fright. i could not see any cause
for it, for the howling of the wolves had ceased altogether; but just
then the moon, sailing through the black clouds, appeared behind the
jagged crest of a beetling, pine-clad rock, and by its light i saw
around us a ring of wolves, with white teeth and lolling red tongues,
with long, sinewy limbs and shaggy hair. they were a hundred times more
terrible in the grim silence which held them than even when they howled.
for myself, i felt a sort of paralysis of fear. it is only when a man
feels himself face to face with such horrors that he can understand
their true import.

all at once the wolves began to howl as though the moonlight had had
some peculiar effect on them. the horses jumped about and reared, and
looked helplessly round with eyes that rolled in a way painful to see;
but the living ring of terror encompassed them on every side; and they
had perforce to remain within it. i called to the coachman to come, for
it seemed to me that our only chance was to try to break out through the
ring and to aid his approach. i shouted and beat the side of the
calèche, hoping by the noise to scare the wolves from that side, so as
to give him a chance of reaching the trap. how he came there, i know
not, but i heard his voice raised in a tone of imperious command, and
looking towards the sound, saw him stand in the roadway. as he swept his
long arms, as though brushing aside some impalpable obstacle, the wolves
fell back and back further still. just then a heavy cloud passed across
the face of the moon, so that we were again in darkness.

when i could see again the driver was climbing into the calèche, and the
wolves had disappeared. this was all so strange and uncanny that a
dreadful fear came upon me, and i was afraid to speak or move. the time
seemed interminable as we swept on our way, now in almost complete
darkness, for the rolling clouds obscured the moon. we kept on
ascending, with occasional periods of quick descent, but in the main
always ascending. suddenly, i became conscious of the fact that the
driver was in the act of pulling up the horses in the courtyard of a
vast ruined castle, from whose tall black windows came no ray of light,
and whose broken battlements showed a jagged line against the moonlit
sky.




chapter ii

jonathan harker’s journal--_continued_


_5 may._--i must have been asleep, for certainly if i had been fully
awake i must have noticed the approach of such a remarkable place. in
the gloom the courtyard looked of considerable size, and as several dark
ways led from it under great round arches, it perhaps seemed bigger than
it really is. i have not yet been able to see it by daylight.

when the calèche stopped, the driver jumped down and held out his hand
to assist me to alight. again i could not but notice his prodigious
strength. his hand actually seemed like a steel vice that could have
crushed mine if he had chosen. then he took out my traps, and placed
them on the ground beside me as i stood close to a great door, old and
studded with large iron nails, and set in a projecting doorway of
massive stone. i could see even in the dim light that the stone was
massively carved, but that the carving had been much worn by time and
weather. as i stood, the driver jumped again into his seat and shook the
reins; the horses started forward, and trap and all disappeared down one
of the dark openings.

i stood in silence where i was, for i did not know what to do. of bell
or knocker there was no sign; through these frowning walls and dark
window openings it was not likely that my voice could penetrate. the
time i waited seemed endless, and i felt doubts and fears crowding upon
me. what sort of place had i come to, and among what kind of people?
what sort of grim adventure was it on which i had embarked? was this a
customary incident in the life of a solicitor’s clerk sent out to
explain the purchase of a london estate to a foreigner? solicitor’s
clerk! mina would not like that. solicitor--for just before leaving
london i got word that my examination was successful; and i am now a
full-blown solicitor! i began to rub my eyes and pinch myself to see if
i were awake. it all seemed like a horrible nightmare to me, and i
expected that i should suddenly awake, and find myself at home, with
the dawn struggling in through the windows, as i had now and again felt
in the morning after a day of overwork. but my flesh answered the
pinching test, and my eyes were not to be deceived. i was indeed awake
and among the carpathians. all i could do now was to be patient, and to
wait the coming of the morning.

just as i had come to this conclusion i heard a heavy step approaching
behind the great door, and saw through the chinks the gleam of a coming
light. then there was the sound of rattling chains and the clanking of
massive bolts drawn back. a key was turned with the loud grating noise
of long disuse, and the great door swung back.

within, stood a tall old man, clean shaven save for a long white
moustache, and clad in black from head to foot, without a single speck
of colour about him anywhere. he held in his hand an antique silver
lamp, in which the flame burned without chimney or globe of any kind,
throwing long quivering shadows as it flickered in the draught of the
open door. the old man motioned me in with his right hand with a courtly
gesture, saying in excellent english, but with a strange intonation:--

“welcome to my house! enter freely and of your own will!” he made no
motion of stepping to meet me, but stood like a statue, as though his
gesture of welcome had fixed him into stone. the instant, however, that
i had stepped over the threshold, he moved impulsively forward, and
holding out his hand grasped mine with a strength which made me wince,
an effect which was not lessened by the fact that it seemed as cold as
ice--more like the hand of a dead than a living man. again he said:--

“welcome to my house. come freely. go safely; and leave something of the
happiness you bring!” the strength of the handshake was so much akin to
that which i had noticed in the driver, whose face i had not seen, that
for a moment i doubted if it were not the same person to whom i was
speaking; so to make sure, i said interrogatively:--

“count dracula?” he bowed in a courtly way as he replied:--

“i am dracula; and i bid you welcome, mr. harker, to my house. come in;
the night air is chill, and you must need to eat and rest.” as he was
speaking, he put the lamp on a bracket on the wall, and stepping out,
took my luggage; he had carried it in before i could forestall him. i
protested but he insisted:--

“nay, sir, you are my guest. it is late, and my people are not
available. let me see to your comfort myself.” he insisted on carrying
my traps along the passage, and then up a great winding stair, and
along another great passage, on whose stone floor our steps rang
heavily. at the end of this he threw open a heavy door, and i rejoiced
to see within a well-lit room in which a table was spread for supper,
and on whose mighty hearth a great fire of logs, freshly replenished,
flamed and flared.

the count halted, putting down my bags, closed the door, and crossing
the room, opened another door, which led into a small octagonal room lit
by a single lamp, and seemingly without a window of any sort. passing
through this, he opened another door, and motioned me to enter. it was a
welcome sight; for here was a great bedroom well lighted and warmed with
another log fire,--also added to but lately, for the top logs were
fresh--which sent a hollow roar up the wide chimney. the count himself
left my luggage inside and withdrew, saying, before he closed the
door:--

“you will need, after your journey, to refresh yourself by making your
toilet. i trust you will find all you wish. when you are ready, come
into the other room, where you will find your supper prepared.”

the light and warmth and the count’s courteous welcome seemed to have
dissipated all my doubts and fears. having then reached my normal state,
i discovered that i was half famished with hunger; so making a hasty
toilet, i went into the other room.

i found supper already laid out. my host, who stood on one side of the
great fireplace, leaning against the stonework, made a graceful wave of
his hand to the table, and said:--

“i pray you, be seated and sup how you please. you will, i trust, excuse
me that i do not join you; but i have dined already, and i do not sup.”

i handed to him the sealed letter which mr. hawkins had entrusted to me.
he opened it and read it gravely; then, with a charming smile, he handed
it to me to read. one passage of it, at least, gave me a thrill of
pleasure.

“i must regret that an attack of gout, from which malady i am a constant
sufferer, forbids absolutely any travelling on my part for some time to
come; but i am happy to say i can send a sufficient substitute, one in
whom i have every possible confidence. he is a young man, full of energy
and talent in his own way, and of a very faithful disposition. he is
discreet and silent, and has grown into manhood in my service. he shall
be ready to attend on you when you will during his stay, and shall take
your instructions in all matters.”

the count himself came forward and took off the cover of a dish, and i
fell to at once on an excellent roast chicken. this, with some cheese
and a salad and a bottle of old tokay, of which i had two glasses, was
my supper. during the time i was eating it the count asked me many
questions as to my journey, and i told him by degrees all i had
experienced.

by this time i had finished my supper, and by my host’s desire had drawn
up a chair by the fire and begun to smoke a cigar which he offered me,
at the same time excusing himself that he did not smoke. i had now an
opportunity of observing him, and found him of a very marked
physiognomy.

his face was a strong--a very strong--aquiline, with high bridge of the
thin nose and peculiarly arched nostrils; with lofty domed forehead, and
hair growing scantily round the temples but profusely elsewhere. his
eyebrows were very massive, almost meeting over the nose, and with bushy
hair that seemed to curl in its own profusion. the mouth, so far as i
could see it under the heavy moustache, was fixed and rather
cruel-looking, with peculiarly sharp white teeth; these protruded over
the lips, whose remarkable ruddiness showed astonishing vitality in a
man of his years. for the rest, his ears were pale, and at the tops
extremely pointed; the chin was broad and strong, and the cheeks firm
though thin. the general effect was one of extraordinary pallor.

hitherto i had noticed the backs of his hands as they lay on his knees
in the firelight, and they had seemed rather white and fine; but seeing
them now close to me, i could not but notice that they were rather
coarse--broad, with squat fingers. strange to say, there were hairs in
the centre of the palm. the nails were long and fine, and cut to a sharp
point. as the count leaned over me and his hands touched me, i could not
repress a shudder. it may have been that his breath was rank, but a
horrible feeling of nausea came over me, which, do what i would, i could
not conceal. the count, evidently noticing it, drew back; and with a
grim sort of smile, which showed more than he had yet done his
protuberant teeth, sat himself down again on his own side of the
fireplace. we were both silent for a while; and as i looked towards the
window i saw the first dim streak of the coming dawn. there seemed a
strange stillness over everything; but as i listened i heard as if from
down below in the valley the howling of many wolves. the count’s eyes
gleamed, and he said:--

“listen to them--the children of the night. what music they make!”
seeing, i suppose, some expression in my face strange to him, he
added:--

“ah, sir, you dwellers in the city cannot enter into the feelings of the
hunter.” then he rose and said:--

“but you must be tired. your bedroom is all ready, and to-morrow you
shall sleep as late as you will. i have to be away till the afternoon;
so sleep well and dream well!” with a courteous bow, he opened for me
himself the door to the octagonal room, and i entered my bedroom....

i am all in a sea of wonders. i doubt; i fear; i think strange things,
which i dare not confess to my own soul. god keep me, if only for the
sake of those dear to me!

       *       *       *       *       *

_7 may._--it is again early morning, but i have rested and enjoyed the
last twenty-four hours. i slept till late in the day, and awoke of my
own accord. when i had dressed myself i went into the room where we had
supped, and found a cold breakfast laid out, with coffee kept hot by the
pot being placed on the hearth. there was a card on the table, on which
was written:--

“i have to be absent for a while. do not wait for me.--d.” i set to and
enjoyed a hearty meal. when i had done, i looked for a bell, so that i
might let the servants know i had finished; but i could not find one.
there are certainly odd deficiencies in the house, considering the
extraordinary evidences of wealth which are round me. the table service
is of gold, and so beautifully wrought that it must be of immense value.
the curtains and upholstery of the chairs and sofas and the hangings of
my bed are of the costliest and most beautiful fabrics, and must have
been of fabulous value when they were made, for they are centuries old,
though in excellent order. i saw something like them in hampton court,
but there they were worn and frayed and moth-eaten. but still in none of
the rooms is there a mirror. there is not even a toilet glass on my
table, and i had to get the little shaving glass from my bag before i
could either shave or brush my hair. i have not yet seen a servant
anywhere, or heard a sound near the castle except the howling of wolves.
some time after i had finished my meal--i do not know whether to call it
breakfast or dinner, for it was between five and six o’clock when i had
it--i looked about for something to read, for i did not like to go about
the castle until i had asked the count’s permission. there was
absolutely nothing in the room, book, newspaper, or even writing
materials; so i opened another door in the room and found a sort of
library. the door opposite mine i tried, but found it locked.

in the library i found, to my great delight, a vast number of english
books, whole shelves full of them, and bound volumes of magazines and
newspapers. a table in the centre was littered with english magazines
and newspapers, though none of them were of very recent date. the books
were of the most varied kind--history, geography, politics, political
economy, botany, geology, law--all relating to england and english life
and customs and manners. there were even such books of reference as the
london directory, the “red” and “blue” books, whitaker’s almanac, the
army and navy lists, and--it somehow gladdened my heart to see it--the
law list.

whilst i was looking at the books, the door opened, and the count
entered. he saluted me in a hearty way, and hoped that i had had a good
night’s rest. then he went on:--

“i am glad you found your way in here, for i am sure there is much that
will interest you. these companions”--and he laid his hand on some of
the books--“have been good friends to me, and for some years past, ever
since i had the idea of going to london, have given me many, many hours
of pleasure. through them i have come to know your great england; and to
know her is to love her. i long to go through the crowded streets of
your mighty london, to be in the midst of the whirl and rush of
humanity, to share its life, its change, its death, and all that makes
it what it is. but alas! as yet i only know your tongue through books.
to you, my friend, i look that i know it to speak.”

“but, count,” i said, “you know and speak english thoroughly!” he bowed
gravely.

“i thank you, my friend, for your all too-flattering estimate, but yet i
fear that i am but a little way on the road i would travel. true, i know
the grammar and the words, but yet i know not how to speak them.”

“indeed,” i said, “you speak excellently.”

“not so,” he answered. “well, i know that, did i move and speak in your
london, none there are who would not know me for a stranger. that is not
enough for me. here i am noble; i am _boyar_; the common people know me,
and i am master. but a stranger in a strange land, he is no one; men
know him not--and to know not is to care not for. i am content if i am
like the rest, so that no man stops if he see me, or pause in his
speaking if he hear my words, ‘ha, ha! a stranger!’ i have been so long
master that i would be master still--or at least that none other should
be master of me. you come to me not alone as agent of my friend peter
hawkins, of exeter, to tell me all about my new estate in london. you
shall, i trust, rest here with me awhile, so that by our talking i may
learn the english intonation; and i would that you tell me when i make
error, even of the smallest, in my speaking. i am sorry that i had to be
away so long to-day; but you will, i know, forgive one who has so many
important affairs in hand.”

of course i said all i could about being willing, and asked if i might
come into that room when i chose. he answered: “yes, certainly,” and
added:--

“you may go anywhere you wish in the castle, except where the doors are
locked, where of course you will not wish to go. there is reason that
all things are as they are, and did you see with my eyes and know with
my knowledge, you would perhaps better understand.” i said i was sure of
this, and then he went on:--

“we are in transylvania; and transylvania is not england. our ways are
not your ways, and there shall be to you many strange things. nay, from
what you have told me of your experiences already, you know something of
what strange things there may be.”

this led to much conversation; and as it was evident that he wanted to
talk, if only for talking’s sake, i asked him many questions regarding
things that had already happened to me or come within my notice.
sometimes he sheered off the subject, or turned the conversation by
pretending not to understand; but generally he answered all i asked most
frankly. then as time went on, and i had got somewhat bolder, i asked
him of some of the strange things of the preceding night, as, for
instance, why the coachman went to the places where he had seen the blue
flames. he then explained to me that it was commonly believed that on a
certain night of the year--last night, in fact, when all evil spirits
are supposed to have unchecked sway--a blue flame is seen over any place
where treasure has been concealed. “that treasure has been hidden,” he
went on, “in the region through which you came last night, there can be
but little doubt; for it was the ground fought over for centuries by the
wallachian, the saxon, and the turk. why, there is hardly a foot of soil
in all this region that has not been enriched by the blood of men,
patriots or invaders. in old days there were stirring times, when the
austrian and the hungarian came up in hordes, and the patriots went out
to meet them--men and women, the aged and the children too--and waited
their coming on the rocks above the passes, that they might sweep
destruction on them with their artificial avalanches. when the invader
was triumphant he found but little, for whatever there was had been
sheltered in the friendly soil.”

“but how,” said i, “can it have remained so long undiscovered, when
there is a sure index to it if men will but take the trouble to look?”
the count smiled, and as his lips ran back over his gums, the long,
sharp, canine teeth showed out strangely; he answered:--

“because your peasant is at heart a coward and a fool! those flames only
appear on one night; and on that night no man of this land will, if he
can help it, stir without his doors. and, dear sir, even if he did he
would not know what to do. why, even the peasant that you tell me of who
marked the place of the flame would not know where to look in daylight
even for his own work. even you would not, i dare be sworn, be able to
find these places again?”

“there you are right,” i said. “i know no more than the dead where even
to look for them.” then we drifted into other matters.

“come,” he said at last, “tell me of london and of the house which you
have procured for me.” with an apology for my remissness, i went into my
own room to get the papers from my bag. whilst i was placing them in
order i heard a rattling of china and silver in the next room, and as i
passed through, noticed that the table had been cleared and the lamp
lit, for it was by this time deep into the dark. the lamps were also lit
in the study or library, and i found the count lying on the sofa,
reading, of all things in the world, an english bradshaw’s guide. when i
came in he cleared the books and papers from the table; and with him i
went into plans and deeds and figures of all sorts. he was interested in
everything, and asked me a myriad questions about the place and its
surroundings. he clearly had studied beforehand all he could get on the
subject of the neighbourhood, for he evidently at the end knew very much
more than i did. when i remarked this, he answered:--

“well, but, my friend, is it not needful that i should? when i go there
i shall be all alone, and my friend harker jonathan--nay, pardon me, i
fall into my country’s habit of putting your patronymic first--my friend
jonathan harker will not be by my side to correct and aid me. he will be
in exeter, miles away, probably working at papers of the law with my
other friend, peter hawkins. so!”

we went thoroughly into the business of the purchase of the estate at
purfleet. when i had told him the facts and got his signature to the
necessary papers, and had written a letter with them ready to post to
mr. hawkins, he began to ask me how i had come across so suitable a
place. i read to him the notes which i had made at the time, and which i
inscribe here:--

“at purfleet, on a by-road, i came across just such a place as seemed to
be required, and where was displayed a dilapidated notice that the place
was for sale. it is surrounded by a high wall, of ancient structure,
built of heavy stones, and has not been repaired for a large number of
years. the closed gates are of heavy old oak and iron, all eaten with
rust.

“the estate is called carfax, no doubt a corruption of the old _quatre
face_, as the house is four-sided, agreeing with the cardinal points of
the compass. it contains in all some twenty acres, quite surrounded by
the solid stone wall above mentioned. there are many trees on it, which
make it in places gloomy, and there is a deep, dark-looking pond or
small lake, evidently fed by some springs, as the water is clear and
flows away in a fair-sized stream. the house is very large and of all
periods back, i should say, to mediæval times, for one part is of stone
immensely thick, with only a few windows high up and heavily barred with
iron. it looks like part of a keep, and is close to an old chapel or
church. i could not enter it, as i had not the key of the door leading
to it from the house, but i have taken with my kodak views of it from
various points. the house has been added to, but in a very straggling
way, and i can only guess at the amount of ground it covers, which must
be very great. there are but few houses close at hand, one being a very
large house only recently added to and formed into a private lunatic
asylum. it is not, however, visible from the grounds.”

when i had finished, he said:--

“i am glad that it is old and big. i myself am of an old family, and to
live in a new house would kill me. a house cannot be made habitable in a
day; and, after all, how few days go to make up a century. i rejoice
also that there is a chapel of old times. we transylvanian nobles love
not to think that our bones may lie amongst the common dead. i seek not
gaiety nor mirth, not the bright voluptuousness of much sunshine and
sparkling waters which please the young and gay. i am no longer young;
and my heart, through weary years of mourning over the dead, is not
attuned to mirth. moreover, the walls of my castle are broken; the
shadows are many, and the wind breathes cold through the broken
battlements and casements. i love the shade and the shadow, and would
be alone with my thoughts when i may.” somehow his words and his look
did not seem to accord, or else it was that his cast of face made his
smile look malignant and saturnine.

presently, with an excuse, he left me, asking me to put all my papers
together. he was some little time away, and i began to look at some of
the books around me. one was an atlas, which i found opened naturally at
england, as if that map had been much used. on looking at it i found in
certain places little rings marked, and on examining these i noticed
that one was near london on the east side, manifestly where his new
estate was situated; the other two were exeter, and whitby on the
yorkshire coast.

it was the better part of an hour when the count returned. “aha!” he
said; “still at your books? good! but you must not work always. come; i
am informed that your supper is ready.” he took my arm, and we went into
the next room, where i found an excellent supper ready on the table. the
count again excused himself, as he had dined out on his being away from
home. but he sat as on the previous night, and chatted whilst i ate.
after supper i smoked, as on the last evening, and the count stayed with
me, chatting and asking questions on every conceivable subject, hour
after hour. i felt that it was getting very late indeed, but i did not
say anything, for i felt under obligation to meet my host’s wishes in
every way. i was not sleepy, as the long sleep yesterday had fortified
me; but i could not help experiencing that chill which comes over one at
the coming of the dawn, which is like, in its way, the turn of the tide.
they say that people who are near death die generally at the change to
the dawn or at the turn of the tide; any one who has when tired, and
tied as it were to his post, experienced this change in the atmosphere
can well believe it. all at once we heard the crow of a cock coming up
with preternatural shrillness through the clear morning air; count
dracula, jumping to his feet, said:--

“why, there is the morning again! how remiss i am to let you stay up so
long. you must make your conversation regarding my dear new country of
england less interesting, so that i may not forget how time flies by
us,” and, with a courtly bow, he quickly left me.

i went into my own room and drew the curtains, but there was little to
notice; my window opened into the courtyard, all i could see was the
warm grey of quickening sky. so i pulled the curtains again, and have
written of this day.

       *       *       *       *       *

_8 may._--i began to fear as i wrote in this book that i was getting too
diffuse; but now i am glad that i went into detail from the first, for
there is something so strange about this place and all in it that i
cannot but feel uneasy. i wish i were safe out of it, or that i had
never come. it may be that this strange night-existence is telling on
me; but would that that were all! if there were any one to talk to i
could bear it, but there is no one. i have only the count to speak with,
and he!--i fear i am myself the only living soul within the place. let
me be prosaic so far as facts can be; it will help me to bear up, and
imagination must not run riot with me. if it does i am lost. let me say
at once how i stand--or seem to.

i only slept a few hours when i went to bed, and feeling that i could
not sleep any more, got up. i had hung my shaving glass by the window,
and was just beginning to shave. suddenly i felt a hand on my shoulder,
and heard the count’s voice saying to me, “good-morning.” i started, for
it amazed me that i had not seen him, since the reflection of the glass
covered the whole room behind me. in starting i had cut myself slightly,
but did not notice it at the moment. having answered the count’s
salutation, i turned to the glass again to see how i had been mistaken.
this time there could be no error, for the man was close to me, and i
could see him over my shoulder. but there was no reflection of him in
the mirror! the whole room behind me was displayed; but there was no
sign of a man in it, except myself. this was startling, and, coming on
the top of so many strange things, was beginning to increase that vague
feeling of uneasiness which i always have when the count is near; but at
the instant i saw that the cut had bled a little, and the blood was
trickling over my chin. i laid down the razor, turning as i did so half
round to look for some sticking plaster. when the count saw my face, his
eyes blazed with a sort of demoniac fury, and he suddenly made a grab at
my throat. i drew away, and his hand touched the string of beads which
held the crucifix. it made an instant change in him, for the fury passed
so quickly that i could hardly believe that it was ever there.

“take care,” he said, “take care how you cut yourself. it is more
dangerous than you think in this country.” then seizing the shaving
glass, he went on: “and this is the wretched thing that has done the
mischief. it is a foul bauble of man’s vanity. away with it!” and
opening the heavy window with one wrench of his terrible hand, he flung
out the glass, which was shattered into a thousand pieces on the stones
of the courtyard far below. then he withdrew without a word. it is very
annoying, for i do not see how i am to shave, unless in my watch-case or
the bottom of the shaving-pot, which is fortunately of metal.

when i went into the dining-room, breakfast was prepared; but i could
not find the count anywhere. so i breakfasted alone. it is strange that
as yet i have not seen the count eat or drink. he must be a very
peculiar man! after breakfast i did a little exploring in the castle. i
went out on the stairs, and found a room looking towards the south. the
view was magnificent, and from where i stood there was every opportunity
of seeing it. the castle is on the very edge of a terrible precipice. a
stone falling from the window would fall a thousand feet without
touching anything! as far as the eye can reach is a sea of green tree
tops, with occasionally a deep rift where there is a chasm. here and
there are silver threads where the rivers wind in deep gorges through
the forests.

but i am not in heart to describe beauty, for when i had seen the view i
explored further; doors, doors, doors everywhere, and all locked and
bolted. in no place save from the windows in the castle walls is there
an available exit.

the castle is a veritable prison, and i am a prisoner!




chapter iii

jonathan harker’s journal--_continued_


when i found that i was a prisoner a sort of wild feeling came over me.
i rushed up and down the stairs, trying every door and peering out of
every window i could find; but after a little the conviction of my
helplessness overpowered all other feelings. when i look back after a
few hours i think i must have been mad for the time, for i behaved much
as a rat does in a trap. when, however, the conviction had come to me
that i was helpless i sat down quietly--as quietly as i have ever done
anything in my life--and began to think over what was best to be done. i
am thinking still, and as yet have come to no definite conclusion. of
one thing only am i certain; that it is no use making my ideas known to
the count. he knows well that i am imprisoned; and as he has done it
himself, and has doubtless his own motives for it, he would only deceive
me if i trusted him fully with the facts. so far as i can see, my only
plan will be to keep my knowledge and my fears to myself, and my eyes
open. i am, i know, either being deceived, like a baby, by my own fears,
or else i am in desperate straits; and if the latter be so, i need, and
shall need, all my brains to get through.

i had hardly come to this conclusion when i heard the great door below
shut, and knew that the count had returned. he did not come at once into
the library, so i went cautiously to my own room and found him making
the bed. this was odd, but only confirmed what i had all along
thought--that there were no servants in the house. when later i saw him
through the chink of the hinges of the door laying the table in the
dining-room, i was assured of it; for if he does himself all these
menial offices, surely it is proof that there is no one else to do them.
this gave me a fright, for if there is no one else in the castle, it
must have been the count himself who was the driver of the coach that
brought me here. this is a terrible thought; for if so, what does it
mean that he could control the wolves, as he did, by only holding up his
hand in silence. how was it that all the people at bistritz and on the
coach had some terrible fear for me? what meant the giving of the
crucifix, of the garlic, of the wild rose, of the mountain ash? bless
that good, good woman who hung the crucifix round my neck! for it is a
comfort and a strength to me whenever i touch it. it is odd that a thing
which i have been taught to regard with disfavour and as idolatrous
should in a time of loneliness and trouble be of help. is it that there
is something in the essence of the thing itself, or that it is a medium,
a tangible help, in conveying memories of sympathy and comfort? some
time, if it may be, i must examine this matter and try to make up my
mind about it. in the meantime i must find out all i can about count
dracula, as it may help me to understand. to-night he may talk of
himself, if i turn the conversation that way. i must be very careful,
however, not to awake his suspicion.

       *       *       *       *       *

_midnight._--i have had a long talk with the count. i asked him a few
questions on transylvania history, and he warmed up to the subject
wonderfully. in his speaking of things and people, and especially of
battles, he spoke as if he had been present at them all. this he
afterwards explained by saying that to a _boyar_ the pride of his house
and name is his own pride, that their glory is his glory, that their
fate is his fate. whenever he spoke of his house he always said “we,”
and spoke almost in the plural, like a king speaking. i wish i could put
down all he said exactly as he said it, for to me it was most
fascinating. it seemed to have in it a whole history of the country. he
grew excited as he spoke, and walked about the room pulling his great
white moustache and grasping anything on which he laid his hands as
though he would crush it by main strength. one thing he said which i
shall put down as nearly as i can; for it tells in its way the story of
his race:--

“we szekelys have a right to be proud, for in our veins flows the blood
of many brave races who fought as the lion fights, for lordship. here,
in the whirlpool of european races, the ugric tribe bore down from
iceland the fighting spirit which thor and wodin gave them, which their
berserkers displayed to such fell intent on the seaboards of europe, ay,
and of asia and africa too, till the peoples thought that the
were-wolves themselves had come. here, too, when they came, they found
the huns, whose warlike fury had swept the earth like a living flame,
till the dying peoples held that in their veins ran the blood of those
old witches, who, expelled from scythia had mated with the devils in the
desert. fools, fools! what devil or what witch was ever so great as
attila, whose blood is in these veins?” he held up his arms. “is it a
wonder that we were a conquering race; that we were proud; that when the
magyar, the lombard, the avar, the bulgar, or the turk poured his
thousands on our frontiers, we drove them back? is it strange that when
arpad and his legions swept through the hungarian fatherland he found us
here when he reached the frontier; that the honfoglalas was completed
there? and when the hungarian flood swept eastward, the szekelys were
claimed as kindred by the victorious magyars, and to us for centuries
was trusted the guarding of the frontier of turkey-land; ay, and more
than that, endless duty of the frontier guard, for, as the turks say,
‘water sleeps, and enemy is sleepless.’ who more gladly than we
throughout the four nations received the ‘bloody sword,’ or at its
warlike call flocked quicker to the standard of the king? when was
redeemed that great shame of my nation, the shame of cassova, when the
flags of the wallach and the magyar went down beneath the crescent? who
was it but one of my own race who as voivode crossed the danube and beat
the turk on his own ground? this was a dracula indeed! woe was it that
his own unworthy brother, when he had fallen, sold his people to the
turk and brought the shame of slavery on them! was it not this dracula,
indeed, who inspired that other of his race who in a later age again and
again brought his forces over the great river into turkey-land; who,
when he was beaten back, came again, and again, and again, though he had
to come alone from the bloody field where his troops were being
slaughtered, since he knew that he alone could ultimately triumph! they
said that he thought only of himself. bah! what good are peasants
without a leader? where ends the war without a brain and heart to
conduct it? again, when, after the battle of mohács, we threw off the
hungarian yoke, we of the dracula blood were amongst their leaders, for
our spirit would not brook that we were not free. ah, young sir, the
szekelys--and the dracula as their heart’s blood, their brains, and
their swords--can boast a record that mushroom growths like the
hapsburgs and the romanoffs can never reach. the warlike days are over.
blood is too precious a thing in these days of dishonourable peace; and
the glories of the great races are as a tale that is told.”

it was by this time close on morning, and we went to bed. (_mem._, this
diary seems horribly like the beginning of the “arabian nights,” for
everything has to break off at cockcrow--or like the ghost of hamlet’s
father.)

       *       *       *       *       *

_12 may._--let me begin with facts--bare, meagre facts, verified by
books and figures, and of which there can be no doubt. i must not
confuse them with experiences which will have to rest on my own
observation, or my memory of them. last evening when the count came from
his room he began by asking me questions on legal matters and on the
doing of certain kinds of business. i had spent the day wearily over
books, and, simply to keep my mind occupied, went over some of the
matters i had been examining at lincoln’s inn. there was a certain
method in the count’s inquiries, so i shall try to put them down in
sequence; the knowledge may somehow or some time be useful to me.

first, he asked if a man in england might have two solicitors or more. i
told him he might have a dozen if he wished, but that it would not be
wise to have more than one solicitor engaged in one transaction, as only
one could act at a time, and that to change would be certain to militate
against his interest. he seemed thoroughly to understand, and went on to
ask if there would be any practical difficulty in having one man to
attend, say, to banking, and another to look after shipping, in case
local help were needed in a place far from the home of the banking
solicitor. i asked him to explain more fully, so that i might not by any
chance mislead him, so he said:--

“i shall illustrate. your friend and mine, mr. peter hawkins, from under
the shadow of your beautiful cathedral at exeter, which is far from
london, buys for me through your good self my place at london. good! now
here let me say frankly, lest you should think it strange that i have
sought the services of one so far off from london instead of some one
resident there, that my motive was that no local interest might be
served save my wish only; and as one of london residence might, perhaps,
have some purpose of himself or friend to serve, i went thus afield to
seek my agent, whose labours should be only to my interest. now, suppose
i, who have much of affairs, wish to ship goods, say, to newcastle, or
durham, or harwich, or dover, might it not be that it could with more
ease be done by consigning to one in these ports?” i answered that
certainly it would be most easy, but that we solicitors had a system of
agency one for the other, so that local work could be done locally on
instruction from any solicitor, so that the client, simply placing
himself in the hands of one man, could have his wishes carried out by
him without further trouble.

“but,” said he, “i could be at liberty to direct myself. is it not so?”

“of course,” i replied; and “such is often done by men of business, who
do not like the whole of their affairs to be known by any one person.”

“good!” he said, and then went on to ask about the means of making
consignments and the forms to be gone through, and of all sorts of
difficulties which might arise, but by forethought could be guarded
against. i explained all these things to him to the best of my ability,
and he certainly left me under the impression that he would have made a
wonderful solicitor, for there was nothing that he did not think of or
foresee. for a man who was never in the country, and who did not
evidently do much in the way of business, his knowledge and acumen were
wonderful. when he had satisfied himself on these points of which he had
spoken, and i had verified all as well as i could by the books
available, he suddenly stood up and said:--

“have you written since your first letter to our friend mr. peter
hawkins, or to any other?” it was with some bitterness in my heart that
i answered that i had not, that as yet i had not seen any opportunity of
sending letters to anybody.

“then write now, my young friend,” he said, laying a heavy hand on my
shoulder: “write to our friend and to any other; and say, if it will
please you, that you shall stay with me until a month from now.”

“do you wish me to stay so long?” i asked, for my heart grew cold at the
thought.

“i desire it much; nay, i will take no refusal. when your master,
employer, what you will, engaged that someone should come on his behalf,
it was understood that my needs only were to be consulted. i have not
stinted. is it not so?”

what could i do but bow acceptance? it was mr. hawkins’s interest, not
mine, and i had to think of him, not myself; and besides, while count
dracula was speaking, there was that in his eyes and in his bearing
which made me remember that i was a prisoner, and that if i wished it i
could have no choice. the count saw his victory in my bow, and his
mastery in the trouble of my face, for he began at once to use them, but
in his own smooth, resistless way:--

“i pray you, my good young friend, that you will not discourse of things
other than business in your letters. it will doubtless please your
friends to know that you are well, and that you look forward to getting
home to them. is it not so?” as he spoke he handed me three sheets of
note-paper and three envelopes. they were all of the thinnest foreign
post, and looking at them, then at him, and noticing his quiet smile,
with the sharp, canine teeth lying over the red underlip, i understood
as well as if he had spoken that i should be careful what i wrote, for
he would be able to read it. so i determined to write only formal notes
now, but to write fully to mr. hawkins in secret, and also to mina, for
to her i could write in shorthand, which would puzzle the count, if he
did see it. when i had written my two letters i sat quiet, reading a
book whilst the count wrote several notes, referring as he wrote them to
some books on his table. then he took up my two and placed them with his
own, and put by his writing materials, after which, the instant the door
had closed behind him, i leaned over and looked at the letters, which
were face down on the table. i felt no compunction in doing so, for
under the circumstances i felt that i should protect myself in every way
i could.

one of the letters was directed to samuel f. billington, no. 7, the
crescent, whitby, another to herr leutner, varna; the third was to
coutts & co., london, and the fourth to herren klopstock & billreuth,
bankers, buda-pesth. the second and fourth were unsealed. i was just
about to look at them when i saw the door-handle move. i sank back in my
seat, having just had time to replace the letters as they had been and
to resume my book before the count, holding still another letter in his
hand, entered the room. he took up the letters on the table and stamped
them carefully, and then turning to me, said:--

“i trust you will forgive me, but i have much work to do in private this
evening. you will, i hope, find all things as you wish.” at the door he
turned, and after a moment’s pause said:--

“let me advise you, my dear young friend--nay, let me warn you with all
seriousness, that should you leave these rooms you will not by any
chance go to sleep in any other part of the castle. it is old, and has
many memories, and there are bad dreams for those who sleep unwisely. be
warned! should sleep now or ever overcome you, or be like to do, then
haste to your own chamber or to these rooms, for your rest will then be
safe. but if you be not careful in this respect, then”--he finished his
speech in a gruesome way, for he motioned with his hands as if he were
washing them. i quite understood; my only doubt was as to whether any
dream could be more terrible than the unnatural, horrible net of gloom
and mystery which seemed closing around me.

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--i endorse the last words written, but this time there is no
doubt in question. i shall not fear to sleep in any place where he is
not. i have placed the crucifix over the head of my bed--i imagine that
my rest is thus freer from dreams; and there it shall remain.

when he left me i went to my room. after a little while, not hearing any
sound, i came out and went up the stone stair to where i could look out
towards the south. there was some sense of freedom in the vast expanse,
inaccessible though it was to me, as compared with the narrow darkness
of the courtyard. looking out on this, i felt that i was indeed in
prison, and i seemed to want a breath of fresh air, though it were of
the night. i am beginning to feel this nocturnal existence tell on me.
it is destroying my nerve. i start at my own shadow, and am full of all
sorts of horrible imaginings. god knows that there is ground for my
terrible fear in this accursed place! i looked out over the beautiful
expanse, bathed in soft yellow moonlight till it was almost as light as
day. in the soft light the distant hills became melted, and the shadows
in the valleys and gorges of velvety blackness. the mere beauty seemed
to cheer me; there was peace and comfort in every breath i drew. as i
leaned from the window my eye was caught by something moving a storey
below me, and somewhat to my left, where i imagined, from the order of
the rooms, that the windows of the count’s own room would look out. the
window at which i stood was tall and deep, stone-mullioned, and though
weatherworn, was still complete; but it was evidently many a day since
the case had been there. i drew back behind the stonework, and looked
carefully out.

what i saw was the count’s head coming out from the window. i did not
see the face, but i knew the man by the neck and the movement of his
back and arms. in any case i could not mistake the hands which i had had
so many opportunities of studying. i was at first interested and
somewhat amused, for it is wonderful how small a matter will interest
and amuse a man when he is a prisoner. but my very feelings changed to
repulsion and terror when i saw the whole man slowly emerge from the
window and begin to crawl down the castle wall over that dreadful abyss,
_face down_ with his cloak spreading out around him like great wings. at
first i could not believe my eyes. i thought it was some trick of the
moonlight, some weird effect of shadow; but i kept looking, and it could
be no delusion. i saw the fingers and toes grasp the corners of the
stones, worn clear of the mortar by the stress of years, and by thus
using every projection and inequality move downwards with considerable
speed, just as a lizard moves along a wall.

what manner of man is this, or what manner of creature is it in the
semblance of man? i feel the dread of this horrible place overpowering
me; i am in fear--in awful fear--and there is no escape for me; i am
encompassed about with terrors that i dare not think of....

       *       *       *       *       *

_15 may._--once more have i seen the count go out in his lizard fashion.
he moved downwards in a sidelong way, some hundred feet down, and a good
deal to the left. he vanished into some hole or window. when his head
had disappeared, i leaned out to try and see more, but without
avail--the distance was too great to allow a proper angle of sight. i
knew he had left the castle now, and thought to use the opportunity to
explore more than i had dared to do as yet. i went back to the room, and
taking a lamp, tried all the doors. they were all locked, as i had
expected, and the locks were comparatively new; but i went down the
stone stairs to the hall where i had entered originally. i found i could
pull back the bolts easily enough and unhook the great chains; but the
door was locked, and the key was gone! that key must be in the count’s
room; i must watch should his door be unlocked, so that i may get it and
escape. i went on to make a thorough examination of the various stairs
and passages, and to try the doors that opened from them. one or two
small rooms near the hall were open, but there was nothing to see in
them except old furniture, dusty with age and moth-eaten. at last,
however, i found one door at the top of the stairway which, though it
seemed to be locked, gave a little under pressure. i tried it harder,
and found that it was not really locked, but that the resistance came
from the fact that the hinges had fallen somewhat, and the heavy door
rested on the floor. here was an opportunity which i might not have
again, so i exerted myself, and with many efforts forced it back so that
i could enter. i was now in a wing of the castle further to the right
than the rooms i knew and a storey lower down. from the windows i could
see that the suite of rooms lay along to the south of the castle, the
windows of the end room looking out both west and south. on the latter
side, as well as to the former, there was a great precipice. the castle
was built on the corner of a great rock, so that on three sides it was
quite impregnable, and great windows were placed here where sling, or
bow, or culverin could not reach, and consequently light and comfort,
impossible to a position which had to be guarded, were secured. to the
west was a great valley, and then, rising far away, great jagged
mountain fastnesses, rising peak on peak, the sheer rock studded with
mountain ash and thorn, whose roots clung in cracks and crevices and
crannies of the stone. this was evidently the portion of the castle
occupied by the ladies in bygone days, for the furniture had more air of
comfort than any i had seen. the windows were curtainless, and the
yellow moonlight, flooding in through the diamond panes, enabled one to
see even colours, whilst it softened the wealth of dust which lay over
all and disguised in some measure the ravages of time and the moth. my
lamp seemed to be of little effect in the brilliant moonlight, but i was
glad to have it with me, for there was a dread loneliness in the place
which chilled my heart and made my nerves tremble. still, it was better
than living alone in the rooms which i had come to hate from the
presence of the count, and after trying a little to school my nerves, i
found a soft quietude come over me. here i am, sitting at a little oak
table where in old times possibly some fair lady sat to pen, with much
thought and many blushes, her ill-spelt love-letter, and writing in my
diary in shorthand all that has happened since i closed it last. it is
nineteenth century up-to-date with a vengeance. and yet, unless my
senses deceive me, the old centuries had, and have, powers of their own
which mere “modernity” cannot kill.

       *       *       *       *       *

_later: the morning of 16 may._--god preserve my sanity, for to this i
am reduced. safety and the assurance of safety are things of the past.
whilst i live on here there is but one thing to hope for, that i may not
go mad, if, indeed, i be not mad already. if i be sane, then surely it
is maddening to think that of all the foul things that lurk in this
hateful place the count is the least dreadful to me; that to him alone i
can look for safety, even though this be only whilst i can serve his
purpose. great god! merciful god! let me be calm, for out of that way
lies madness indeed. i begin to get new lights on certain things which
have puzzled me. up to now i never quite knew what shakespeare meant
when he made hamlet say:--

    “my tablets! quick, my tablets!
    ’tis meet that i put it down,” etc.,

for now, feeling as though my own brain were unhinged or as if the shock
had come which must end in its undoing, i turn to my diary for repose.
the habit of entering accurately must help to soothe me.

the count’s mysterious warning frightened me at the time; it frightens
me more now when i think of it, for in future he has a fearful hold upon
me. i shall fear to doubt what he may say!

when i had written in my diary and had fortunately replaced the book and
pen in my pocket i felt sleepy. the count’s warning came into my mind,
but i took a pleasure in disobeying it. the sense of sleep was upon me,
and with it the obstinacy which sleep brings as outrider. the soft
moonlight soothed, and the wide expanse without gave a sense of freedom
which refreshed me. i determined not to return to-night to the
gloom-haunted rooms, but to sleep here, where, of old, ladies had sat
and sung and lived sweet lives whilst their gentle breasts were sad for
their menfolk away in the midst of remorseless wars. i drew a great
couch out of its place near the corner, so that as i lay, i could look
at the lovely view to east and south, and unthinking of and uncaring for
the dust, composed myself for sleep. i suppose i must have fallen
asleep; i hope so, but i fear, for all that followed was startlingly
real--so real that now sitting here in the broad, full sunlight of the
morning, i cannot in the least believe that it was all sleep.

i was not alone. the room was the same, unchanged in any way since i
came into it; i could see along the floor, in the brilliant moonlight,
my own footsteps marked where i had disturbed the long accumulation of
dust. in the moonlight opposite me were three young women, ladies by
their dress and manner. i thought at the time that i must be dreaming
when i saw them, for, though the moonlight was behind them, they threw
no shadow on the floor. they came close to me, and looked at me for some
time, and then whispered together. two were dark, and had high aquiline
noses, like the count, and great dark, piercing eyes that seemed to be
almost red when contrasted with the pale yellow moon. the other was
fair, as fair as can be, with great wavy masses of golden hair and eyes
like pale sapphires. i seemed somehow to know her face, and to know it
in connection with some dreamy fear, but i could not recollect at the
moment how or where. all three had brilliant white teeth that shone like
pearls against the ruby of their voluptuous lips. there was something
about them that made me uneasy, some longing and at the same time some
deadly fear. i felt in my heart a wicked, burning desire that they would
kiss me with those red lips. it is not good to note this down, lest some
day it should meet mina’s eyes and cause her pain; but it is the truth.
they whispered together, and then they all three laughed--such a
silvery, musical laugh, but as hard as though the sound never could have
come through the softness of human lips. it was like the intolerable,
tingling sweetness of water-glasses when played on by a cunning hand.
the fair girl shook her head coquettishly, and the other two urged her
on. one said:--

“go on! you are first, and we shall follow; yours is the right to
begin.” the other added:--

“he is young and strong; there are kisses for us all.” i lay quiet,
looking out under my eyelashes in an agony of delightful anticipation.
the fair girl advanced and bent over me till i could feel the movement
of her breath upon me. sweet it was in one sense, honey-sweet, and sent
the same tingling through the nerves as her voice, but with a bitter
underlying the sweet, a bitter offensiveness, as one smells in blood.

i was afraid to raise my eyelids, but looked out and saw perfectly under
the lashes. the girl went on her knees, and bent over me, simply
gloating. there was a deliberate voluptuousness which was both thrilling
and repulsive, and as she arched her neck she actually licked her lips
like an animal, till i could see in the moonlight the moisture shining
on the scarlet lips and on the red tongue as it lapped the white sharp
teeth. lower and lower went her head as the lips went below the range of
my mouth and chin and seemed about to fasten on my throat. then she
paused, and i could hear the churning sound of her tongue as it licked
her teeth and lips, and could feel the hot breath on my neck. then the
skin of my throat began to tingle as one’s flesh does when the hand that
is to tickle it approaches nearer--nearer. i could feel the soft,
shivering touch of the lips on the super-sensitive skin of my throat,
and the hard dents of two sharp teeth, just touching and pausing there.
i closed my eyes in a languorous ecstasy and waited--waited with beating
heart.

but at that instant, another sensation swept through me as quick as
lightning. i was conscious of the presence of the count, and of his
being as if lapped in a storm of fury. as my eyes opened involuntarily i
saw his strong hand grasp the slender neck of the fair woman and with
giant’s power draw it back, the blue eyes transformed with fury, the
white teeth champing with rage, and the fair cheeks blazing red with
passion. but the count! never did i imagine such wrath and fury, even to
the demons of the pit. his eyes were positively blazing. the red light
in them was lurid, as if the flames of hell-fire blazed behind them. his
face was deathly pale, and the lines of it were hard like drawn wires;
the thick eyebrows that met over the nose now seemed like a heaving bar
of white-hot metal. with a fierce sweep of his arm, he hurled the woman
from him, and then motioned to the others, as though he were beating
them back; it was the same imperious gesture that i had seen used to the
wolves. in a voice which, though low and almost in a whisper seemed to
cut through the air and then ring round the room he said:--

“how dare you touch him, any of you? how dare you cast eyes on him when
i had forbidden it? back, i tell you all! this man belongs to me! beware
how you meddle with him, or you’ll have to deal with me.” the fair girl,
with a laugh of ribald coquetry, turned to answer him:--

“you yourself never loved; you never love!” on this the other women
joined, and such a mirthless, hard, soulless laughter rang through the
room that it almost made me faint to hear; it seemed like the pleasure
of fiends. then the count turned, after looking at my face attentively,
and said in a soft whisper:--

“yes, i too can love; you yourselves can tell it from the past. is it
not so? well, now i promise you that when i am done with him you shall
kiss him at your will. now go! go! i must awaken him, for there is work
to be done.”

“are we to have nothing to-night?” said one of them, with a low laugh,
as she pointed to the bag which he had thrown upon the floor, and which
moved as though there were some living thing within it. for answer he
nodded his head. one of the women jumped forward and opened it. if my
ears did not deceive me there was a gasp and a low wail, as of a
half-smothered child. the women closed round, whilst i was aghast with
horror; but as i looked they disappeared, and with them the dreadful
bag. there was no door near them, and they could not have passed me
without my noticing. they simply seemed to fade into the rays of the
moonlight and pass out through the window, for i could see outside the
dim, shadowy forms for a moment before they entirely faded away.

then the horror overcame me, and i sank down unconscious.




chapter iv

jonathan harker’s journal--_continued_


i awoke in my own bed. if it be that i had not dreamt, the count must
have carried me here. i tried to satisfy myself on the subject, but
could not arrive at any unquestionable result. to be sure, there were
certain small evidences, such as that my clothes were folded and laid by
in a manner which was not my habit. my watch was still unwound, and i am
rigorously accustomed to wind it the last thing before going to bed, and
many such details. but these things are no proof, for they may have been
evidences that my mind was not as usual, and, from some cause or
another, i had certainly been much upset. i must watch for proof. of one
thing i am glad: if it was that the count carried me here and undressed
me, he must have been hurried in his task, for my pockets are intact. i
am sure this diary would have been a mystery to him which he would not
have brooked. he would have taken or destroyed it. as i look round this
room, although it has been to me so full of fear, it is now a sort of
sanctuary, for nothing can be more dreadful than those awful women, who
were--who _are_--waiting to suck my blood.

       *       *       *       *       *

_18 may._--i have been down to look at that room again in daylight, for
i _must_ know the truth. when i got to the doorway at the top of the
stairs i found it closed. it had been so forcibly driven against the
jamb that part of the woodwork was splintered. i could see that the bolt
of the lock had not been shot, but the door is fastened from the inside.
i fear it was no dream, and must act on this surmise.

       *       *       *       *       *

_19 may._--i am surely in the toils. last night the count asked me in
the suavest tones to write three letters, one saying that my work here
was nearly done, and that i should start for home within a few days,
another that i was starting on the next morning from the time of the
letter, and the third that i had left the castle and arrived at
bistritz. i would fain have rebelled, but felt that in the present state
of things it would be madness to quarrel openly with the count whilst i
am so absolutely in his power; and to refuse would be to excite his
suspicion and to arouse his anger. he knows that i know too much, and
that i must not live, lest i be dangerous to him; my only chance is to
prolong my opportunities. something may occur which will give me a
chance to escape. i saw in his eyes something of that gathering wrath
which was manifest when he hurled that fair woman from him. he explained
to me that posts were few and uncertain, and that my writing now would
ensure ease of mind to my friends; and he assured me with so much
impressiveness that he would countermand the later letters, which would
be held over at bistritz until due time in case chance would admit of my
prolonging my stay, that to oppose him would have been to create new
suspicion. i therefore pretended to fall in with his views, and asked
him what dates i should put on the letters. he calculated a minute, and
then said:--

“the first should be june 12, the second june 19, and the third june
29.”

i know now the span of my life. god help me!

       *       *       *       *       *

_28 may._--there is a chance of escape, or at any rate of being able to
send word home. a band of szgany have come to the castle, and are
encamped in the courtyard. these szgany are gipsies; i have notes of
them in my book. they are peculiar to this part of the world, though
allied to the ordinary gipsies all the world over. there are thousands
of them in hungary and transylvania, who are almost outside all law.
they attach themselves as a rule to some great noble or _boyar_, and
call themselves by his name. they are fearless and without religion,
save superstition, and they talk only their own varieties of the romany
tongue.

i shall write some letters home, and shall try to get them to have them
posted. i have already spoken them through my window to begin
acquaintanceship. they took their hats off and made obeisance and many
signs, which, however, i could not understand any more than i could
their spoken language....

       *       *       *       *       *

i have written the letters. mina’s is in shorthand, and i simply ask mr.
hawkins to communicate with her. to her i have explained my situation,
but without the horrors which i may only surmise. it would shock and
frighten her to death were i to expose my heart to her. should the
letters not carry, then the count shall not yet know my secret or the
extent of my knowledge....

       *       *       *       *       *

i have given the letters; i threw them through the bars of my window
with a gold piece, and made what signs i could to have them posted. the
man who took them pressed them to his heart and bowed, and then put them
in his cap. i could do no more. i stole back to the study, and began to
read. as the count did not come in, i have written here....

       *       *       *       *       *

the count has come. he sat down beside me, and said in his smoothest
voice as he opened two letters:--

“the szgany has given me these, of which, though i know not whence they
come, i shall, of course, take care. see!”--he must have looked at
it--“one is from you, and to my friend peter hawkins; the other”--here
he caught sight of the strange symbols as he opened the envelope, and
the dark look came into his face, and his eyes blazed wickedly--“the
other is a vile thing, an outrage upon friendship and hospitality! it is
not signed. well! so it cannot matter to us.” and he calmly held letter
and envelope in the flame of the lamp till they were consumed. then he
went on:--

“the letter to hawkins--that i shall, of course, send on, since it is
yours. your letters are sacred to me. your pardon, my friend, that
unknowingly i did break the seal. will you not cover it again?” he held
out the letter to me, and with a courteous bow handed me a clean
envelope. i could only redirect it and hand it to him in silence. when
he went out of the room i could hear the key turn softly. a minute later
i went over and tried it, and the door was locked.

when, an hour or two after, the count came quietly into the room, his
coming awakened me, for i had gone to sleep on the sofa. he was very
courteous and very cheery in his manner, and seeing that i had been
sleeping, he said:--

“so, my friend, you are tired? get to bed. there is the surest rest. i
may not have the pleasure to talk to-night, since there are many labours
to me; but you will sleep, i pray.” i passed to my room and went to bed,
and, strange to say, slept without dreaming. despair has its own calms.

       *       *       *       *       *

_31 may._--this morning when i woke i thought i would provide myself
with some paper and envelopes from my bag and keep them in my pocket, so
that i might write in case i should get an opportunity, but again a
surprise, again a shock!

every scrap of paper was gone, and with it all my notes, my memoranda,
relating to railways and travel, my letter of credit, in fact all that
might be useful to me were i once outside the castle. i sat and pondered
awhile, and then some thought occurred to me, and i made search of my
portmanteau and in the wardrobe where i had placed my clothes.

the suit in which i had travelled was gone, and also my overcoat and
rug; i could find no trace of them anywhere. this looked like some new
scheme of villainy....

       *       *       *       *       *

_17 june._--this morning, as i was sitting on the edge of my bed
cudgelling my brains, i heard without a cracking of whips and pounding
and scraping of horses’ feet up the rocky path beyond the courtyard.
with joy i hurried to the window, and saw drive into the yard two great
leiter-wagons, each drawn by eight sturdy horses, and at the head of
each pair a slovak, with his wide hat, great nail-studded belt, dirty
sheepskin, and high boots. they had also their long staves in hand. i
ran to the door, intending to descend and try and join them through the
main hall, as i thought that way might be opened for them. again a
shock: my door was fastened on the outside.

then i ran to the window and cried to them. they looked up at me
stupidly and pointed, but just then the “hetman” of the szgany came out,
and seeing them pointing to my window, said something, at which they
laughed. henceforth no effort of mine, no piteous cry or agonised
entreaty, would make them even look at me. they resolutely turned away.
the leiter-wagons contained great, square boxes, with handles of thick
rope; these were evidently empty by the ease with which the slovaks
handled them, and by their resonance as they were roughly moved. when
they were all unloaded and packed in a great heap in one corner of the
yard, the slovaks were given some money by the szgany, and spitting on
it for luck, lazily went each to his horse’s head. shortly afterwards, i
heard the cracking of their whips die away in the distance.

       *       *       *       *       *

_24 june, before morning._--last night the count left me early, and
locked himself into his own room. as soon as i dared i ran up the
winding stair, and looked out of the window, which opened south. i
thought i would watch for the count, for there is something going on.
the szgany are quartered somewhere in the castle and are doing work of
some kind. i know it, for now and then i hear a far-away muffled sound
as of mattock and spade, and, whatever it is, it must be the end of some
ruthless villainy.

i had been at the window somewhat less than half an hour, when i saw
something coming out of the count’s window. i drew back and watched
carefully, and saw the whole man emerge. it was a new shock to me to
find that he had on the suit of clothes which i had worn whilst
travelling here, and slung over his shoulder the terrible bag which i
had seen the women take away. there could be no doubt as to his quest,
and in my garb, too! this, then, is his new scheme of evil: that he will
allow others to see me, as they think, so that he may both leave
evidence that i have been seen in the towns or villages posting my own
letters, and that any wickedness which he may do shall by the local
people be attributed to me.

it makes me rage to think that this can go on, and whilst i am shut up
here, a veritable prisoner, but without that protection of the law which
is even a criminal’s right and consolation.

i thought i would watch for the count’s return, and for a long time sat
doggedly at the window. then i began to notice that there were some
quaint little specks floating in the rays of the moonlight. they were
like the tiniest grains of dust, and they whirled round and gathered in
clusters in a nebulous sort of way. i watched them with a sense of
soothing, and a sort of calm stole over me. i leaned back in the
embrasure in a more comfortable position, so that i could enjoy more
fully the aërial gambolling.

something made me start up, a low, piteous howling of dogs somewhere far
below in the valley, which was hidden from my sight. louder it seemed to
ring in my ears, and the floating motes of dust to take new shapes to
the sound as they danced in the moonlight. i felt myself struggling to
awake to some call of my instincts; nay, my very soul was struggling,
and my half-remembered sensibilities were striving to answer the call. i
was becoming hypnotised! quicker and quicker danced the dust; the
moonbeams seemed to quiver as they went by me into the mass of gloom
beyond. more and more they gathered till they seemed to take dim phantom
shapes. and then i started, broad awake and in full possession of my
senses, and ran screaming from the place. the phantom shapes, which were
becoming gradually materialised from the moonbeams, were those of the
three ghostly women to whom i was doomed. i fled, and felt somewhat
safer in my own room, where there was no moonlight and where the lamp
was burning brightly.

when a couple of hours had passed i heard something stirring in the
count’s room, something like a sharp wail quickly suppressed; and then
there was silence, deep, awful silence, which chilled me. with a
beating heart, i tried the door; but i was locked in my prison, and
could do nothing. i sat down and simply cried.

as i sat i heard a sound in the courtyard without--the agonised cry of a
woman. i rushed to the window, and throwing it up, peered out between
the bars. there, indeed, was a woman with dishevelled hair, holding her
hands over her heart as one distressed with running. she was leaning
against a corner of the gateway. when she saw my face at the window she
threw herself forward, and shouted in a voice laden with menace:--

“monster, give me my child!”

she threw herself on her knees, and raising up her hands, cried the same
words in tones which wrung my heart. then she tore her hair and beat her
breast, and abandoned herself to all the violences of extravagant
emotion. finally, she threw herself forward, and, though i could not see
her, i could hear the beating of her naked hands against the door.

somewhere high overhead, probably on the tower, i heard the voice of the
count calling in his harsh, metallic whisper. his call seemed to be
answered from far and wide by the howling of wolves. before many minutes
had passed a pack of them poured, like a pent-up dam when liberated,
through the wide entrance into the courtyard.

there was no cry from the woman, and the howling of the wolves was but
short. before long they streamed away singly, licking their lips.

i could not pity her, for i knew now what had become of her child, and
she was better dead.

what shall i do? what can i do? how can i escape from this dreadful
thing of night and gloom and fear?

       *       *       *       *       *

_25 june, morning._--no man knows till he has suffered from the night
how sweet and how dear to his heart and eye the morning can be. when the
sun grew so high this morning that it struck the top of the great
gateway opposite my window, the high spot which it touched seemed to me
as if the dove from the ark had lighted there. my fear fell from me as
if it had been a vaporous garment which dissolved in the warmth. i must
take action of some sort whilst the courage of the day is upon me. last
night one of my post-dated letters went to post, the first of that fatal
series which is to blot out the very traces of my existence from the
earth.

let me not think of it. action!

it has always been at night-time that i have been molested or
threatened, or in some way in danger or in fear. i have not yet seen the
count in the daylight. can it be that he sleeps when others wake, that
he may be awake whilst they sleep? if i could only get into his room!
but there is no possible way. the door is always locked, no way for me.

yes, there is a way, if one dares to take it. where his body has gone
why may not another body go? i have seen him myself crawl from his
window. why should not i imitate him, and go in by his window? the
chances are desperate, but my need is more desperate still. i shall risk
it. at the worst it can only be death; and a man’s death is not a
calf’s, and the dreaded hereafter may still be open to me. god help me
in my task! good-bye, mina, if i fail; good-bye, my faithful friend and
second father; good-bye, all, and last of all mina!

       *       *       *       *       *

_same day, later._--i have made the effort, and god, helping me, have
come safely back to this room. i must put down every detail in order. i
went whilst my courage was fresh straight to the window on the south
side, and at once got outside on the narrow ledge of stone which runs
around the building on this side. the stones are big and roughly cut,
and the mortar has by process of time been washed away between them. i
took off my boots, and ventured out on the desperate way. i looked down
once, so as to make sure that a sudden glimpse of the awful depth would
not overcome me, but after that kept my eyes away from it. i knew pretty
well the direction and distance of the count’s window, and made for it
as well as i could, having regard to the opportunities available. i did
not feel dizzy--i suppose i was too excited--and the time seemed
ridiculously short till i found myself standing on the window-sill and
trying to raise up the sash. i was filled with agitation, however, when
i bent down and slid feet foremost in through the window. then i looked
around for the count, but, with surprise and gladness, made a discovery.
the room was empty! it was barely furnished with odd things, which
seemed to have never been used; the furniture was something the same
style as that in the south rooms, and was covered with dust. i looked
for the key, but it was not in the lock, and i could not find it
anywhere. the only thing i found was a great heap of gold in one
corner--gold of all kinds, roman, and british, and austrian, and
hungarian, and greek and turkish money, covered with a film of dust, as
though it had lain long in the ground. none of it that i noticed was
less than three hundred years old. there were also chains and ornaments,
some jewelled, but all of them old and stained.

at one corner of the room was a heavy door. i tried it, for, since i
could not find the key of the room or the key of the outer door, which
was the main object of my search, i must make further examination, or
all my efforts would be in vain. it was open, and led through a stone
passage to a circular stairway, which went steeply down. i descended,
minding carefully where i went, for the stairs were dark, being only lit
by loopholes in the heavy masonry. at the bottom there was a dark,
tunnel-like passage, through which came a deathly, sickly odour, the
odour of old earth newly turned. as i went through the passage the smell
grew closer and heavier. at last i pulled open a heavy door which stood
ajar, and found myself in an old, ruined chapel, which had evidently
been used as a graveyard. the roof was broken, and in two places were
steps leading to vaults, but the ground had recently been dug over, and
the earth placed in great wooden boxes, manifestly those which had been
brought by the slovaks. there was nobody about, and i made search for
any further outlet, but there was none. then i went over every inch of
the ground, so as not to lose a chance. i went down even into the
vaults, where the dim light struggled, although to do so was a dread to
my very soul. into two of these i went, but saw nothing except fragments
of old coffins and piles of dust; in the third, however, i made a
discovery.

there, in one of the great boxes, of which there were fifty in all, on a
pile of newly dug earth, lay the count! he was either dead or asleep, i
could not say which--for the eyes were open and stony, but without the
glassiness of death--and the cheeks had the warmth of life through all
their pallor; the lips were as red as ever. but there was no sign of
movement, no pulse, no breath, no beating of the heart. i bent over him,
and tried to find any sign of life, but in vain. he could not have lain
there long, for the earthy smell would have passed away in a few hours.
by the side of the box was its cover, pierced with holes here and there.
i thought he might have the keys on him, but when i went to search i saw
the dead eyes, and in them, dead though they were, such a look of hate,
though unconscious of me or my presence, that i fled from the place, and
leaving the count’s room by the window, crawled again up the castle
wall. regaining my room, i threw myself panting upon the bed and tried
to think....

       *       *       *       *       *

_29 june._--to-day is the date of my last letter, and the count has
taken steps to prove that it was genuine, for again i saw him leave the
castle by the same window, and in my clothes. as he went down the wall,
lizard fashion, i wished i had a gun or some lethal weapon, that i might
destroy him; but i fear that no weapon wrought alone by man’s hand would
have any effect on him. i dared not wait to see him return, for i feared
to see those weird sisters. i came back to the library, and read there
till i fell asleep.

i was awakened by the count, who looked at me as grimly as a man can
look as he said:--

“to-morrow, my friend, we must part. you return to your beautiful
england, i to some work which may have such an end that we may never
meet. your letter home has been despatched; to-morrow i shall not be
here, but all shall be ready for your journey. in the morning come the
szgany, who have some labours of their own here, and also come some
slovaks. when they have gone, my carriage shall come for you, and shall
bear you to the borgo pass to meet the diligence from bukovina to
bistritz. but i am in hopes that i shall see more of you at castle
dracula.” i suspected him, and determined to test his sincerity.
sincerity! it seems like a profanation of the word to write it in
connection with such a monster, so asked him point-blank:--

“why may i not go to-night?”

“because, dear sir, my coachman and horses are away on a mission.”

“but i would walk with pleasure. i want to get away at once.” he smiled,
such a soft, smooth, diabolical smile that i knew there was some trick
behind his smoothness. he said:--

“and your baggage?”

“i do not care about it. i can send for it some other time.”

the count stood up, and said, with a sweet courtesy which made me rub my
eyes, it seemed so real:--

“you english have a saying which is close to my heart, for its spirit is
that which rules our _boyars_: ‘welcome the coming; speed the parting
guest.’ come with me, my dear young friend. not an hour shall you wait
in my house against your will, though sad am i at your going, and that
you so suddenly desire it. come!” with a stately gravity, he, with the
lamp, preceded me down the stairs and along the hall. suddenly he
stopped.

“hark!”

close at hand came the howling of many wolves. it was almost as if the
sound sprang up at the rising of his hand, just as the music of a great
orchestra seems to leap under the bâton of the conductor. after a pause
of a moment, he proceeded, in his stately way, to the door, drew back
the ponderous bolts, unhooked the heavy chains, and began to draw it
open.

to my intense astonishment i saw that it was unlocked. suspiciously, i
looked all round, but could see no key of any kind.

as the door began to open, the howling of the wolves without grew louder
and angrier; their red jaws, with champing teeth, and their blunt-clawed
feet as they leaped, came in through the opening door. i knew then that
to struggle at the moment against the count was useless. with such
allies as these at his command, i could do nothing. but still the door
continued slowly to open, and only the count’s body stood in the gap.
suddenly it struck me that this might be the moment and means of my
doom; i was to be given to the wolves, and at my own instigation. there
was a diabolical wickedness in the idea great enough for the count, and
as a last chance i cried out:--

“shut the door; i shall wait till morning!” and covered my face with my
hands to hide my tears of bitter disappointment. with one sweep of his
powerful arm, the count threw the door shut, and the great bolts clanged
and echoed through the hall as they shot back into their places.

in silence we returned to the library, and after a minute or two i went
to my own room. the last i saw of count dracula was his kissing his hand
to me; with a red light of triumph in his eyes, and with a smile that
judas in hell might be proud of.

when i was in my room and about to lie down, i thought i heard a
whispering at my door. i went to it softly and listened. unless my ears
deceived me, i heard the voice of the count:--

“back, back, to your own place! your time is not yet come. wait! have
patience! to-night is mine. to-morrow night is yours!” there was a low,
sweet ripple of laughter, and in a rage i threw open the door, and saw
without the three terrible women licking their lips. as i appeared they
all joined in a horrible laugh, and ran away.

i came back to my room and threw myself on my knees. it is then so near
the end? to-morrow! to-morrow! lord, help me, and those to whom i am
dear!

       *       *       *       *       *

_30 june, morning._--these may be the last words i ever write in this
diary. i slept till just before the dawn, and when i woke threw myself
on my knees, for i determined that if death came he should find me
ready.

at last i felt that subtle change in the air, and knew that the morning
had come. then came the welcome cock-crow, and i felt that i was safe.
with a glad heart, i opened my door and ran down to the hall. i had seen
that the door was unlocked, and now escape was before me. with hands
that trembled with eagerness, i unhooked the chains and drew back the
massive bolts.

but the door would not move. despair seized me. i pulled, and pulled, at
the door, and shook it till, massive as it was, it rattled in its
casement. i could see the bolt shot. it had been locked after i left the
count.

then a wild desire took me to obtain that key at any risk, and i
determined then and there to scale the wall again and gain the count’s
room. he might kill me, but death now seemed the happier choice of
evils. without a pause i rushed up to the east window, and scrambled
down the wall, as before, into the count’s room. it was empty, but that
was as i expected. i could not see a key anywhere, but the heap of gold
remained. i went through the door in the corner and down the winding
stair and along the dark passage to the old chapel. i knew now well
enough where to find the monster i sought.

the great box was in the same place, close against the wall, but the lid
was laid on it, not fastened down, but with the nails ready in their
places to be hammered home. i knew i must reach the body for the key, so
i raised the lid, and laid it back against the wall; and then i saw
something which filled my very soul with horror. there lay the count,
but looking as if his youth had been half renewed, for the white hair
and moustache were changed to dark iron-grey; the cheeks were fuller,
and the white skin seemed ruby-red underneath; the mouth was redder than
ever, for on the lips were gouts of fresh blood, which trickled from the
corners of the mouth and ran over the chin and neck. even the deep,
burning eyes seemed set amongst swollen flesh, for the lids and pouches
underneath were bloated. it seemed as if the whole awful creature were
simply gorged with blood. he lay like a filthy leech, exhausted with his
repletion. i shuddered as i bent over to touch him, and every sense in
me revolted at the contact; but i had to search, or i was lost. the
coming night might see my own body a banquet in a similar way to those
horrid three. i felt all over the body, but no sign could i find of the
key. then i stopped and looked at the count. there was a mocking smile
on the bloated face which seemed to drive me mad. this was the being i
was helping to transfer to london, where, perhaps, for centuries to come
he might, amongst its teeming millions, satiate his lust for blood, and
create a new and ever-widening circle of semi-demons to batten on the
helpless. the very thought drove me mad. a terrible desire came upon me
to rid the world of such a monster. there was no lethal weapon at hand,
but i seized a shovel which the workmen had been using to fill the
cases, and lifting it high, struck, with the edge downward, at the
hateful face. but as i did so the head turned, and the eyes fell full
upon me, with all their blaze of basilisk horror. the sight seemed to
paralyse me, and the shovel turned in my hand and glanced from the face,
merely making a deep gash above the forehead. the shovel fell from my
hand across the box, and as i pulled it away the flange of the blade
caught the edge of the lid which fell over again, and hid the horrid
thing from my sight. the last glimpse i had was of the bloated face,
blood-stained and fixed with a grin of malice which would have held its
own in the nethermost hell.

i thought and thought what should be my next move, but my brain seemed
on fire, and i waited with a despairing feeling growing over me. as i
waited i heard in the distance a gipsy song sung by merry voices coming
closer, and through their song the rolling of heavy wheels and the
cracking of whips; the szgany and the slovaks of whom the count had
spoken were coming. with a last look around and at the box which
contained the vile body, i ran from the place and gained the count’s
room, determined to rush out at the moment the door should be opened.
with strained ears, i listened, and heard downstairs the grinding of the
key in the great lock and the falling back of the heavy door. there must
have been some other means of entry, or some one had a key for one of
the locked doors. then there came the sound of many feet tramping and
dying away in some passage which sent up a clanging echo. i turned to
run down again towards the vault, where i might find the new entrance;
but at the moment there seemed to come a violent puff of wind, and the
door to the winding stair blew to with a shock that set the dust from
the lintels flying. when i ran to push it open, i found that it was
hopelessly fast. i was again a prisoner, and the net of doom was closing
round me more closely.

as i write there is in the passage below a sound of many tramping feet
and the crash of weights being set down heavily, doubtless the boxes,
with their freight of earth. there is a sound of hammering; it is the
box being nailed down. now i can hear the heavy feet tramping again
along the hall, with many other idle feet coming behind them.

the door is shut, and the chains rattle; there is a grinding of the key
in the lock; i can hear the key withdraw: then another door opens and
shuts; i hear the creaking of lock and bolt.

hark! in the courtyard and down the rocky way the roll of heavy wheels,
the crack of whips, and the chorus of the szgany as they pass into the
distance.

i am alone in the castle with those awful women. faugh! mina is a woman,
and there is nought in common. they are devils of the pit!

i shall not remain alone with them; i shall try to scale the castle wall
farther than i have yet attempted. i shall take some of the gold with
me, lest i want it later. i may find a way from this dreadful place.

and then away for home! away to the quickest and nearest train! away
from this cursed spot, from this cursed land, where the devil and his
children still walk with earthly feet!

at least god’s mercy is better than that of these monsters, and the
precipice is steep and high. at its foot a man may sleep--as a man.
good-bye, all! mina!




chapter v

_letter from miss mina murray to miss lucy westenra._


“_9 may._

“my dearest lucy,--

“forgive my long delay in writing, but i have been simply overwhelmed
with work. the life of an assistant schoolmistress is sometimes trying.
i am longing to be with you, and by the sea, where we can talk together
freely and build our castles in the air. i have been working very hard
lately, because i want to keep up with jonathan’s studies, and i have
been practising shorthand very assiduously. when we are married i shall
be able to be useful to jonathan, and if i can stenograph well enough i
can take down what he wants to say in this way and write it out for
him on the typewriter, at which also i am practising very hard. he
and i sometimes write letters in shorthand, and he is keeping a
stenographic journal of his travels abroad. when i am with you i
shall keep a diary in the same way. i don’t mean one of those
two-pages-to-the-week-with-sunday-squeezed-in-a-corner diaries, but a
sort of journal which i can write in whenever i feel inclined. i do not
suppose there will be much of interest to other people; but it is not
intended for them. i may show it to jonathan some day if there is in it
anything worth sharing, but it is really an exercise book. i shall try
to do what i see lady journalists do: interviewing and writing
descriptions and trying to remember conversations. i am told that, with
a little practice, one can remember all that goes on or that one hears
said during a day. however, we shall see. i will tell you of my little
plans when we meet. i have just had a few hurried lines from jonathan
from transylvania. he is well, and will be returning in about a week. i
am longing to hear all his news. it must be so nice to see strange
countries. i wonder if we--i mean jonathan and i--shall ever see them
together. there is the ten o’clock bell ringing. good-bye.

“your loving

“mina.

“tell me all the news when you write. you have not told me anything for
a long time. i hear rumours, and especially of a tall, handsome,
curly-haired man???”


_letter, lucy westenra to mina murray_.

“_17, chatham street_,

“_wednesday_.

“my dearest mina,--

“i must say you tax me _very_ unfairly with being a bad correspondent. i
wrote to you _twice_ since we parted, and your last letter was only your
_second_. besides, i have nothing to tell you. there is really nothing
to interest you. town is very pleasant just now, and we go a good deal
to picture-galleries and for walks and rides in the park. as to the
tall, curly-haired man, i suppose it was the one who was with me at the
last pop. some one has evidently been telling tales. that was mr.
holmwood. he often comes to see us, and he and mamma get on very well
together; they have so many things to talk about in common. we met some
time ago a man that would just _do for you_, if you were not already
engaged to jonathan. he is an excellent _parti_, being handsome, well
off, and of good birth. he is a doctor and really clever. just fancy! he
is only nine-and-twenty, and he has an immense lunatic asylum all under
his own care. mr. holmwood introduced him to me, and he called here to
see us, and often comes now. i think he is one of the most resolute men
i ever saw, and yet the most calm. he seems absolutely imperturbable. i
can fancy what a wonderful power he must have over his patients. he has
a curious habit of looking one straight in the face, as if trying to
read one’s thoughts. he tries this on very much with me, but i flatter
myself he has got a tough nut to crack. i know that from my glass. do
you ever try to read your own face? _i do_, and i can tell you it is not
a bad study, and gives you more trouble than you can well fancy if you
have never tried it. he says that i afford him a curious psychological
study, and i humbly think i do. i do not, as you know, take sufficient
interest in dress to be able to describe the new fashions. dress is a
bore. that is slang again, but never mind; arthur says that every day.
there, it is all out. mina, we have told all our secrets to each other
since we were _children_; we have slept together and eaten together, and
laughed and cried together; and now, though i have spoken, i would like
to speak more. oh, mina, couldn’t you guess? i love him. i am blushing
as i write, for although i _think_ he loves me, he has not told me so in
words. but oh, mina, i love him; i love him; i love him! there, that
does me good. i wish i were with you, dear, sitting by the fire
undressing, as we used to sit; and i would try to tell you what i feel.
i do not know how i am writing this even to you. i am afraid to stop,
or i should tear up the letter, and i don’t want to stop, for i _do_ so
want to tell you all. let me hear from you _at once_, and tell me all
that you think about it. mina, i must stop. good-night. bless me in your
prayers; and, mina, pray for my happiness.

“lucy.

“p.s.--i need not tell you this is a secret. good-night again.

“l.”

_letter, lucy westenra to mina murray_.

“_24 may_.

“my dearest mina,--

“thanks, and thanks, and thanks again for your sweet letter. it was so
nice to be able to tell you and to have your sympathy.

“my dear, it never rains but it pours. how true the old proverbs are.
here am i, who shall be twenty in september, and yet i never had a
proposal till to-day, not a real proposal, and to-day i have had three.
just fancy! three proposals in one day! isn’t it awful! i feel sorry,
really and truly sorry, for two of the poor fellows. oh, mina, i am so
happy that i don’t know what to do with myself. and three proposals!
but, for goodness’ sake, don’t tell any of the girls, or they would be
getting all sorts of extravagant ideas and imagining themselves injured
and slighted if in their very first day at home they did not get six at
least. some girls are so vain! you and i, mina dear, who are engaged and
are going to settle down soon soberly into old married women, can
despise vanity. well, i must tell you about the three, but you must keep
it a secret, dear, from _every one_, except, of course, jonathan. you
will tell him, because i would, if i were in your place, certainly tell
arthur. a woman ought to tell her husband everything--don’t you think
so, dear?--and i must be fair. men like women, certainly their wives, to
be quite as fair as they are; and women, i am afraid, are not always
quite as fair as they should be. well, my dear, number one came just
before lunch. i told you of him, dr. john seward, the lunatic-asylum
man, with the strong jaw and the good forehead. he was very cool
outwardly, but was nervous all the same. he had evidently been schooling
himself as to all sorts of little things, and remembered them; but he
almost managed to sit down on his silk hat, which men don’t generally do
when they are cool, and then when he wanted to appear at ease he kept
playing with a lancet in a way that made me nearly scream. he spoke to
me, mina, very straightforwardly. he told me how dear i was to him,
though he had known me so little, and what his life would be with me to
help and cheer him. he was going to tell me how unhappy he would be if i
did not care for him, but when he saw me cry he said that he was a brute
and would not add to my present trouble. then he broke off and asked if
i could love him in time; and when i shook my head his hands trembled,
and then with some hesitation he asked me if i cared already for any one
else. he put it very nicely, saying that he did not want to wring my
confidence from me, but only to know, because if a woman’s heart was
free a man might have hope. and then, mina, i felt a sort of duty to
tell him that there was some one. i only told him that much, and then he
stood up, and he looked very strong and very grave as he took both my
hands in his and said he hoped i would be happy, and that if i ever
wanted a friend i must count him one of my best. oh, mina dear, i can’t
help crying: and you must excuse this letter being all blotted. being
proposed to is all very nice and all that sort of thing, but it isn’t at
all a happy thing when you have to see a poor fellow, whom you know
loves you honestly, going away and looking all broken-hearted, and to
know that, no matter what he may say at the moment, you are passing
quite out of his life. my dear, i must stop here at present, i feel so
miserable, though i am so happy.

“_evening._

“arthur has just gone, and i feel in better spirits than when i left
off, so i can go on telling you about the day. well, my dear, number two
came after lunch. he is such a nice fellow, an american from texas, and
he looks so young and so fresh that it seems almost impossible that he
has been to so many places and has had such adventures. i sympathise
with poor desdemona when she had such a dangerous stream poured in her
ear, even by a black man. i suppose that we women are such cowards that
we think a man will save us from fears, and we marry him. i know now
what i would do if i were a man and wanted to make a girl love me. no, i
don’t, for there was mr. morris telling us his stories, and arthur never
told any, and yet---- my dear, i am somewhat previous. mr. quincey p.
morris found me alone. it seems that a man always does find a girl
alone. no, he doesn’t, for arthur tried twice to _make_ a chance, and i
helping him all i could; i am not ashamed to say it now. i must tell you
beforehand that mr. morris doesn’t always speak slang--that is to say,
he never does so to strangers or before them, for he is really well
educated and has exquisite manners--but he found out that it amused me
to hear him talk american slang, and whenever i was present, and there
was no one to be shocked, he said such funny things. i am afraid, my
dear, he has to invent it all, for it fits exactly into whatever else he
has to say. but this is a way slang has. i do not know myself if i shall
ever speak slang; i do not know if arthur likes it, as i have never
heard him use any as yet. well, mr. morris sat down beside me and looked
as happy and jolly as he could, but i could see all the same that he was
very nervous. he took my hand in his, and said ever so sweetly:--

“‘miss lucy, i know i ain’t good enough to regulate the fixin’s of your
little shoes, but i guess if you wait till you find a man that is you
will go join them seven young women with the lamps when you quit. won’t
you just hitch up alongside of me and let us go down the long road
together, driving in double harness?’

“well, he did look so good-humoured and so jolly that it didn’t seem
half so hard to refuse him as it did poor dr. seward; so i said, as
lightly as i could, that i did not know anything of hitching, and that i
wasn’t broken to harness at all yet. then he said that he had spoken in
a light manner, and he hoped that if he had made a mistake in doing so
on so grave, so momentous, an occasion for him, i would forgive him. he
really did look serious when he was saying it, and i couldn’t help
feeling a bit serious too--i know, mina, you will think me a horrid
flirt--though i couldn’t help feeling a sort of exultation that he was
number two in one day. and then, my dear, before i could say a word he
began pouring out a perfect torrent of love-making, laying his very
heart and soul at my feet. he looked so earnest over it that i shall
never again think that a man must be playful always, and never earnest,
because he is merry at times. i suppose he saw something in my face
which checked him, for he suddenly stopped, and said with a sort of
manly fervour that i could have loved him for if i had been free:--

“‘lucy, you are an honest-hearted girl, i know. i should not be here
speaking to you as i am now if i did not believe you clean grit, right
through to the very depths of your soul. tell me, like one good fellow
to another, is there any one else that you care for? and if there is
i’ll never trouble you a hair’s breadth again, but will be, if you will
let me, a very faithful friend.’

“my dear mina, why are men so noble when we women are so little worthy
of them? here was i almost making fun of this great-hearted, true
gentleman. i burst into tears--i am afraid, my dear, you will think
this a very sloppy letter in more ways than one--and i really felt very
badly. why can’t they let a girl marry three men, or as many as want
her, and save all this trouble? but this is heresy, and i must not say
it. i am glad to say that, though i was crying, i was able to look into
mr. morris’s brave eyes, and i told him out straight:--

“‘yes, there is some one i love, though he has not told me yet that he
even loves me.’ i was right to speak to him so frankly, for quite a
light came into his face, and he put out both his hands and took mine--i
think i put them into his--and said in a hearty way:--

“‘that’s my brave girl. it’s better worth being late for a chance of
winning you than being in time for any other girl in the world. don’t
cry, my dear. if it’s for me, i’m a hard nut to crack; and i take it
standing up. if that other fellow doesn’t know his happiness, well, he’d
better look for it soon, or he’ll have to deal with me. little girl,
your honesty and pluck have made me a friend, and that’s rarer than a
lover; it’s more unselfish anyhow. my dear, i’m going to have a pretty
lonely walk between this and kingdom come. won’t you give me one kiss?
it’ll be something to keep off the darkness now and then. you can, you
know, if you like, for that other good fellow--he must be a good fellow,
my dear, and a fine fellow, or you could not love him--hasn’t spoken
yet.’ that quite won me, mina, for it _was_ brave and sweet of him, and
noble, too, to a rival--wasn’t it?--and he so sad; so i leant over and
kissed him. he stood up with my two hands in his, and as he looked down
into my face--i am afraid i was blushing very much--he said:--

“‘little girl, i hold your hand, and you’ve kissed me, and if these
things don’t make us friends nothing ever will. thank you for your sweet
honesty to me, and good-bye.’ he wrung my hand, and taking up his hat,
went straight out of the room without looking back, without a tear or a
quiver or a pause; and i am crying like a baby. oh, why must a man like
that be made unhappy when there are lots of girls about who would
worship the very ground he trod on? i know i would if i were free--only
i don’t want to be free. my dear, this quite upset me, and i feel i
cannot write of happiness just at once, after telling you of it; and i
don’t wish to tell of the number three until it can be all happy.

“ever your loving

“lucy.

“p.s.--oh, about number three--i needn’t tell you of number three, need
i? besides, it was all so confused; it seemed only a moment from his
coming into the room till both his arms were round me, and he was
kissing me. i am very, very happy, and i don’t know what i have done to
deserve it. i must only try in the future to show that i am not
ungrateful to god for all his goodness to me in sending to me such a
lover, such a husband, and such a friend.

“good-bye.”


_dr. seward’s diary._

(kept in phonograph)

_25 may._--ebb tide in appetite to-day. cannot eat, cannot rest, so
diary instead. since my rebuff of yesterday i have a sort of empty
feeling; nothing in the world seems of sufficient importance to be worth
the doing.... as i knew that the only cure for this sort of thing was
work, i went down amongst the patients. i picked out one who has
afforded me a study of much interest. he is so quaint that i am
determined to understand him as well as i can. to-day i seemed to get
nearer than ever before to the heart of his mystery.

i questioned him more fully than i had ever done, with a view to making
myself master of the facts of his hallucination. in my manner of doing
it there was, i now see, something of cruelty. i seemed to wish to keep
him to the point of his madness--a thing which i avoid with the patients
as i would the mouth of hell.

(_mem._, under what circumstances would i _not_ avoid the pit of hell?)
_omnia romæ venalia sunt._ hell has its price! _verb. sap._ if there be
anything behind this instinct it will be valuable to trace it afterwards
_accurately_, so i had better commence to do so, therefore--

r. m. renfield, ætat 59.--sanguine temperament; great physical strength;
morbidly excitable; periods of gloom, ending in some fixed idea which i
cannot make out. i presume that the sanguine temperament itself and the
disturbing influence end in a mentally-accomplished finish; a possibly
dangerous man, probably dangerous if unselfish. in selfish men caution
is as secure an armour for their foes as for themselves. what i think of
on this point is, when self is the fixed point the centripetal force is
balanced with the centrifugal; when duty, a cause, etc., is the fixed
point, the latter force is paramount, and only accident or a series of
accidents can balance it.


_letter, quincey p. morris to hon. arthur holmwood._

“_25 may._

“my dear art,--

“we’ve told yarns by the camp-fire in the prairies; and dressed one
another’s wounds after trying a landing at the marquesas; and drunk
healths on the shore of titicaca. there are more yarns to be told, and
other wounds to be healed, and another health to be drunk. won’t you let
this be at my camp-fire to-morrow night? i have no hesitation in asking
you, as i know a certain lady is engaged to a certain dinner-party, and
that you are free. there will only be one other, our old pal at the
korea, jack seward. he’s coming, too, and we both want to mingle our
weeps over the wine-cup, and to drink a health with all our hearts to
the happiest man in all the wide world, who has won the noblest heart
that god has made and the best worth winning. we promise you a hearty
welcome, and a loving greeting, and a health as true as your own right
hand. we shall both swear to leave you at home if you drink too deep to
a certain pair of eyes. come!

“yours, as ever and always,

“quincey p. morris.”


_telegram from arthur holmwood to quincey p. morris._

“_26 may._

“count me in every time. i bear messages which will make both your ears
tingle.

“art.”




chapter vi

mina murray’s journal


_24 july. whitby._--lucy met me at the station, looking sweeter and
lovelier than ever, and we drove up to the house at the crescent in
which they have rooms. this is a lovely place. the little river, the
esk, runs through a deep valley, which broadens out as it comes near the
harbour. a great viaduct runs across, with high piers, through which the
view seems somehow further away than it really is. the valley is
beautifully green, and it is so steep that when you are on the high land
on either side you look right across it, unless you are near enough to
see down. the houses of the old town--the side away from us--are all
red-roofed, and seem piled up one over the other anyhow, like the
pictures we see of nuremberg. right over the town is the ruin of whitby
abbey, which was sacked by the danes, and which is the scene of part of
“marmion,” where the girl was built up in the wall. it is a most noble
ruin, of immense size, and full of beautiful and romantic bits; there is
a legend that a white lady is seen in one of the windows. between it and
the town there is another church, the parish one, round which is a big
graveyard, all full of tombstones. this is to my mind the nicest spot in
whitby, for it lies right over the town, and has a full view of the
harbour and all up the bay to where the headland called kettleness
stretches out into the sea. it descends so steeply over the harbour that
part of the bank has fallen away, and some of the graves have been
destroyed. in one place part of the stonework of the graves stretches
out over the sandy pathway far below. there are walks, with seats beside
them, through the churchyard; and people go and sit there all day long
looking at the beautiful view and enjoying the breeze. i shall come and
sit here very often myself and work. indeed, i am writing now, with my
book on my knee, and listening to the talk of three old men who are
sitting beside me. they seem to do nothing all day but sit up here and
talk.

the harbour lies below me, with, on the far side, one long granite wall
stretching out into the sea, with a curve outwards at the end of it, in
the middle of which is a lighthouse. a heavy sea-wall runs along outside
of it. on the near side, the sea-wall makes an elbow crooked inversely,
and its end too has a lighthouse. between the two piers there is a
narrow opening into the harbour, which then suddenly widens.

it is nice at high water; but when the tide is out it shoals away to
nothing, and there is merely the stream of the esk, running between
banks of sand, with rocks here and there. outside the harbour on this
side there rises for about half a mile a great reef, the sharp edge of
which runs straight out from behind the south lighthouse. at the end of
it is a buoy with a bell, which swings in bad weather, and sends in a
mournful sound on the wind. they have a legend here that when a ship is
lost bells are heard out at sea. i must ask the old man about this; he
is coming this way....

he is a funny old man. he must be awfully old, for his face is all
gnarled and twisted like the bark of a tree. he tells me that he is
nearly a hundred, and that he was a sailor in the greenland fishing
fleet when waterloo was fought. he is, i am afraid, a very sceptical
person, for when i asked him about the bells at sea and the white lady
at the abbey he said very brusquely:--

“i wouldn’t fash masel’ about them, miss. them things be all wore out.
mind, i don’t say that they never was, but i do say that they wasn’t in
my time. they be all very well for comers and trippers, an’ the like,
but not for a nice young lady like you. them feet-folks from york and
leeds that be always eatin’ cured herrin’s an’ drinkin’ tea an’ lookin’
out to buy cheap jet would creed aught. i wonder masel’ who’d be
bothered tellin’ lies to them--even the newspapers, which is full of
fool-talk.” i thought he would be a good person to learn interesting
things from, so i asked him if he would mind telling me something about
the whale-fishing in the old days. he was just settling himself to begin
when the clock struck six, whereupon he laboured to get up, and said:--

“i must gang ageeanwards home now, miss. my grand-daughter doesn’t like
to be kept waitin’ when the tea is ready, for it takes me time to
crammle aboon the grees, for there be a many of ’em; an’, miss, i lack
belly-timber sairly by the clock.”

he hobbled away, and i could see him hurrying, as well as he could, down
the steps. the steps are a great feature on the place. they lead from
the town up to the church, there are hundreds of them--i do not know how
many--and they wind up in a delicate curve; the slope is so gentle that
a horse could easily walk up and down them. i think they must originally
have had something to do with the abbey. i shall go home too. lucy went
out visiting with her mother, and as they were only duty calls, i did
not go. they will be home by this.

       *       *       *       *       *

_1 august._--i came up here an hour ago with lucy, and we had a most
interesting talk with my old friend and the two others who always come
and join him. he is evidently the sir oracle of them, and i should think
must have been in his time a most dictatorial person. he will not admit
anything, and downfaces everybody. if he can’t out-argue them he bullies
them, and then takes their silence for agreement with his views. lucy
was looking sweetly pretty in her white lawn frock; she has got a
beautiful colour since she has been here. i noticed that the old men did
not lose any time in coming up and sitting near her when we sat down.
she is so sweet with old people; i think they all fell in love with her
on the spot. even my old man succumbed and did not contradict her, but
gave me double share instead. i got him on the subject of the legends,
and he went off at once into a sort of sermon. i must try to remember it
and put it down:--

“it be all fool-talk, lock, stock, and barrel; that’s what it be, an’
nowt else. these bans an’ wafts an’ boh-ghosts an’ barguests an’ bogles
an’ all anent them is only fit to set bairns an’ dizzy women
a-belderin’. they be nowt but air-blebs. they, an’ all grims an’ signs
an’ warnin’s, be all invented by parsons an’ illsome beuk-bodies an’
railway touters to skeer an’ scunner hafflin’s, an’ to get folks to do
somethin’ that they don’t other incline to. it makes me ireful to think
o’ them. why, it’s them that, not content with printin’ lies on paper
an’ preachin’ them out of pulpits, does want to be cuttin’ them on the
tombstones. look here all around you in what airt ye will; all them
steans, holdin’ up their heads as well as they can out of their pride,
is acant--simply tumblin’ down with the weight o’ the lies wrote on
them, ‘here lies the body’ or ‘sacred to the memory’ wrote on all of
them, an’ yet in nigh half of them there bean’t no bodies at all; an’
the memories of them bean’t cared a pinch of snuff about, much less
sacred. lies all of them, nothin’ but lies of one kind or another! my
gog, but it’ll be a quare scowderment at the day of judgment when they
come tumblin’ up in their death-sarks, all jouped together an’ tryin’ to
drag their tombsteans with them to prove how good they was; some of them
trimmlin’ and ditherin’, with their hands that dozzened an’ slippy from
lyin’ in the sea that they can’t even keep their grup o’ them.”

i could see from the old fellow’s self-satisfied air and the way in
which he looked round for the approval of his cronies that he was
“showing off,” so i put in a word to keep him going:--

“oh, mr. swales, you can’t be serious. surely these tombstones are not
all wrong?”

“yabblins! there may be a poorish few not wrong, savin’ where they make
out the people too good; for there be folk that do think a balm-bowl be
like the sea, if only it be their own. the whole thing be only lies. now
look you here; you come here a stranger, an’ you see this kirk-garth.” i
nodded, for i thought it better to assent, though i did not quite
understand his dialect. i knew it had something to do with the church.
he went on: “and you consate that all these steans be aboon folk that be
happed here, snod an’ snog?” i assented again. “then that be just where
the lie comes in. why, there be scores of these lay-beds that be toom as
old dun’s ’bacca-box on friday night.” he nudged one of his companions,
and they all laughed. “and my gog! how could they be otherwise? look at
that one, the aftest abaft the bier-bank: read it!” i went over and
read:--

“edward spencelagh, master mariner, murdered by pirates off the coast of
andres, april, 1854, æt. 30.” when i came back mr. swales went on:--

“who brought him home, i wonder, to hap him here? murdered off the coast
of andres! an’ you consated his body lay under! why, i could name ye a
dozen whose bones lie in the greenland seas above”--he pointed
northwards--“or where the currents may have drifted them. there be the
steans around ye. ye can, with your young eyes, read the small-print of
the lies from here. this braithwaite lowrey--i knew his father, lost in
the _lively_ off greenland in ’20; or andrew woodhouse, drowned in the
same seas in 1777; or john paxton, drowned off cape farewell a year
later; or old john rawlings, whose grandfather sailed with me, drowned
in the gulf of finland in ’50. do ye think that all these men will have
to make a rush to whitby when the trumpet sounds? i have me antherums
aboot it! i tell ye that when they got here they’d be jommlin’ an’
jostlin’ one another that way that it ’ud be like a fight up on the ice
in the old days, when we’d be at one another from daylight to dark, an’
tryin’ to tie up our cuts by the light of the aurora borealis.” this was
evidently local pleasantry, for the old man cackled over it, and his
cronies joined in with gusto.

“but,” i said, “surely you are not quite correct, for you start on the
assumption that all the poor people, or their spirits, will have to
take their tombstones with them on the day of judgment. do you think
that will be really necessary?”

“well, what else be they tombstones for? answer me that, miss!”

“to please their relatives, i suppose.”

“to please their relatives, you suppose!” this he said with intense
scorn. “how will it pleasure their relatives to know that lies is wrote
over them, and that everybody in the place knows that they be lies?” he
pointed to a stone at our feet which had been laid down as a slab, on
which the seat was rested, close to the edge of the cliff. “read the
lies on that thruff-stean,” he said. the letters were upside down to me
from where i sat, but lucy was more opposite to them, so she leant over
and read:--

“sacred to the memory of george canon, who died, in the hope of a
glorious resurrection, on july, 29, 1873, falling from the rocks at
kettleness. this tomb was erected by his sorrowing mother to her dearly
beloved son. ‘he was the only son of his mother, and she was a widow.’
really, mr. swales, i don’t see anything very funny in that!” she spoke
her comment very gravely and somewhat severely.

“ye don’t see aught funny! ha! ha! but that’s because ye don’t gawm the
sorrowin’ mother was a hell-cat that hated him because he was
acrewk’d--a regular lamiter he was--an’ he hated her so that he
committed suicide in order that she mightn’t get an insurance she put on
his life. he blew nigh the top of his head off with an old musket that
they had for scarin’ the crows with. ’twarn’t for crows then, for it
brought the clegs and the dowps to him. that’s the way he fell off the
rocks. and, as to hopes of a glorious resurrection, i’ve often heard him
say masel’ that he hoped he’d go to hell, for his mother was so pious
that she’d be sure to go to heaven, an’ he didn’t want to addle where
she was. now isn’t that stean at any rate”--he hammered it with his
stick as he spoke--“a pack of lies? and won’t it make gabriel keckle
when geordie comes pantin’ up the grees with the tombstean balanced on
his hump, and asks it to be took as evidence!”

i did not know what to say, but lucy turned the conversation as she
said, rising up:--

“oh, why did you tell us of this? it is my favourite seat, and i cannot
leave it; and now i find i must go on sitting over the grave of a
suicide.”

“that won’t harm ye, my pretty; an’ it may make poor geordie gladsome to
have so trim a lass sittin’ on his lap. that won’t hurt ye. why, i’ve
sat here off an’ on for nigh twenty years past, an’ it hasn’t done me
no harm. don’t ye fash about them as lies under ye, or that doesn’ lie
there either! it’ll be time for ye to be getting scart when ye see the
tombsteans all run away with, and the place as bare as a stubble-field.
there’s the clock, an’ i must gang. my service to ye, ladies!” and off
he hobbled.

lucy and i sat awhile, and it was all so beautiful before us that we
took hands as we sat; and she told me all over again about arthur and
their coming marriage. that made me just a little heart-sick, for i
haven’t heard from jonathan for a whole month.

       *       *       *       *       *

_the same day._ i came up here alone, for i am very sad. there was no
letter for me. i hope there cannot be anything the matter with jonathan.
the clock has just struck nine. i see the lights scattered all over the
town, sometimes in rows where the streets are, and sometimes singly;
they run right up the esk and die away in the curve of the valley. to my
left the view is cut off by a black line of roof of the old house next
the abbey. the sheep and lambs are bleating in the fields away behind
me, and there is a clatter of a donkey’s hoofs up the paved road below.
the band on the pier is playing a harsh waltz in good time, and further
along the quay there is a salvation army meeting in a back street.
neither of the bands hears the other, but up here i hear and see them
both. i wonder where jonathan is and if he is thinking of me! i wish he
were here.


_dr. seward’s diary._

_5 june._--the case of renfield grows more interesting the more i get to
understand the man. he has certain qualities very largely developed;
selfishness, secrecy, and purpose. i wish i could get at what is the
object of the latter. he seems to have some settled scheme of his own,
but what it is i do not yet know. his redeeming quality is a love of
animals, though, indeed, he has such curious turns in it that i
sometimes imagine he is only abnormally cruel. his pets are of odd
sorts. just now his hobby is catching flies. he has at present such a
quantity that i have had myself to expostulate. to my astonishment, he
did not break out into a fury, as i expected, but took the matter in
simple seriousness. he thought for a moment, and then said: “may i have
three days? i shall clear them away.” of course, i said that would do. i
must watch him.

       *       *       *       *       *

_18 june._--he has turned his mind now to spiders, and has got several
very big fellows in a box. he keeps feeding them with his flies, and
the number of the latter is becoming sensibly diminished, although he
has used half his food in attracting more flies from outside to his
room.

       *       *       *       *       *

_1 july._--his spiders are now becoming as great a nuisance as his
flies, and to-day i told him that he must get rid of them. he looked
very sad at this, so i said that he must clear out some of them, at all
events. he cheerfully acquiesced in this, and i gave him the same time
as before for reduction. he disgusted me much while with him, for when a
horrid blow-fly, bloated with some carrion food, buzzed into the room,
he caught it, held it exultantly for a few moments between his finger
and thumb, and, before i knew what he was going to do, put it in his
mouth and ate it. i scolded him for it, but he argued quietly that it
was very good and very wholesome; that it was life, strong life, and
gave life to him. this gave me an idea, or the rudiment of one. i must
watch how he gets rid of his spiders. he has evidently some deep problem
in his mind, for he keeps a little note-book in which he is always
jotting down something. whole pages of it are filled with masses of
figures, generally single numbers added up in batches, and then the
totals added in batches again, as though he were “focussing” some
account, as the auditors put it.

       *       *       *       *       *

_8 july._--there is a method in his madness, and the rudimentary idea in
my mind is growing. it will be a whole idea soon, and then, oh,
unconscious cerebration! you will have to give the wall to your
conscious brother. i kept away from my friend for a few days, so that i
might notice if there were any change. things remain as they were except
that he has parted with some of his pets and got a new one. he has
managed to get a sparrow, and has already partially tamed it. his means
of taming is simple, for already the spiders have diminished. those that
do remain, however, are well fed, for he still brings in the flies by
tempting them with his food.

       *       *       *       *       *

_19 july._--we are progressing. my friend has now a whole colony of
sparrows, and his flies and spiders are almost obliterated. when i came
in he ran to me and said he wanted to ask me a great favour--a very,
very great favour; and as he spoke he fawned on me like a dog. i asked
him what it was, and he said, with a sort of rapture in his voice and
bearing:--

“a kitten, a nice little, sleek playful kitten, that i can play with,
and teach, and feed--and feed--and feed!” i was not unprepared for this
request, for i had noticed how his pets went on increasing in size and
vivacity, but i did not care that his pretty family of tame sparrows
should be wiped out in the same manner as the flies and the spiders; so
i said i would see about it, and asked him if he would not rather have a
cat than a kitten. his eagerness betrayed him as he answered:--

“oh, yes, i would like a cat! i only asked for a kitten lest you should
refuse me a cat. no one would refuse me a kitten, would they?” i shook
my head, and said that at present i feared it would not be possible, but
that i would see about it. his face fell, and i could see a warning of
danger in it, for there was a sudden fierce, sidelong look which meant
killing. the man is an undeveloped homicidal maniac. i shall test him
with his present craving and see how it will work out; then i shall know
more.

       *       *       *       *       *

_10 p. m._--i have visited him again and found him sitting in a corner
brooding. when i came in he threw himself on his knees before me and
implored me to let him have a cat; that his salvation depended upon it.
i was firm, however, and told him that he could not have it, whereupon
he went without a word, and sat down, gnawing his fingers, in the corner
where i had found him. i shall see him in the morning early.

       *       *       *       *       *

_20 july._--visited renfield very early, before the attendant went his
rounds. found him up and humming a tune. he was spreading out his sugar,
which he had saved, in the window, and was manifestly beginning his
fly-catching again; and beginning it cheerfully and with a good grace. i
looked around for his birds, and not seeing them, asked him where they
were. he replied, without turning round, that they had all flown away.
there were a few feathers about the room and on his pillow a drop of
blood. i said nothing, but went and told the keeper to report to me if
there were anything odd about him during the day.

       *       *       *       *       *

_11 a. m._--the attendant has just been to me to say that renfield has
been very sick and has disgorged a whole lot of feathers. “my belief is,
doctor,” he said, “that he has eaten his birds, and that he just took
and ate them raw!”

       *       *       *       *       *

_11 p. m._--i gave renfield a strong opiate to-night, enough to make
even him sleep, and took away his pocket-book to look at it. the thought
that has been buzzing about my brain lately is complete, and the theory
proved. my homicidal maniac is of a peculiar kind. i shall have to
invent a new classification for him, and call him a zoöphagous
(life-eating) maniac; what he desires is to absorb as many lives as he
can, and he has laid himself out to achieve it in a cumulative way. he
gave many flies to one spider and many spiders to one bird, and then
wanted a cat to eat the many birds. what would have been his later
steps? it would almost be worth while to complete the experiment. it
might be done if there were only a sufficient cause. men sneered at
vivisection, and yet look at its results to-day! why not advance science
in its most difficult and vital aspect--the knowledge of the brain? had
i even the secret of one such mind--did i hold the key to the fancy of
even one lunatic--i might advance my own branch of science to a pitch
compared with which burdon-sanderson’s physiology or ferrier’s
brain-knowledge would be as nothing. if only there were a sufficient
cause! i must not think too much of this, or i may be tempted; a good
cause might turn the scale with me, for may not i too be of an
exceptional brain, congenitally?

how well the man reasoned; lunatics always do within their own scope. i
wonder at how many lives he values a man, or if at only one. he has
closed the account most accurately, and to-day begun a new record. how
many of us begin a new record with each day of our lives?

to me it seems only yesterday that my whole life ended with my new hope,
and that truly i began a new record. so it will be until the great
recorder sums me up and closes my ledger account with a balance to
profit or loss. oh, lucy, lucy, i cannot be angry with you, nor can i be
angry with my friend whose happiness is yours; but i must only wait on
hopeless and work. work! work!

if i only could have as strong a cause as my poor mad friend there--a
good, unselfish cause to make me work--that would be indeed happiness.


_mina murray’s journal._

_26 july._--i am anxious, and it soothes me to express myself here; it
is like whispering to one’s self and listening at the same time. and
there is also something about the shorthand symbols that makes it
different from writing. i am unhappy about lucy and about jonathan. i
had not heard from jonathan for some time, and was very concerned; but
yesterday dear mr. hawkins, who is always so kind, sent me a letter from
him. i had written asking him if he had heard, and he said the enclosed
had just been received. it is only a line dated from castle dracula,
and says that he is just starting for home. that is not like jonathan;
i do not understand it, and it makes me uneasy. then, too, lucy,
although she is so well, has lately taken to her old habit of walking in
her sleep. her mother has spoken to me about it, and we have decided
that i am to lock the door of our room every night. mrs. westenra has
got an idea that sleep-walkers always go out on roofs of houses and
along the edges of cliffs and then get suddenly wakened and fall over
with a despairing cry that echoes all over the place. poor dear, she is
naturally anxious about lucy, and she tells me that her husband, lucy’s
father, had the same habit; that he would get up in the night and dress
himself and go out, if he were not stopped. lucy is to be married in the
autumn, and she is already planning out her dresses and how her house is
to be arranged. i sympathise with her, for i do the same, only jonathan
and i will start in life in a very simple way, and shall have to try to
make both ends meet. mr. holmwood--he is the hon. arthur holmwood, only
son of lord godalming--is coming up here very shortly--as soon as he can
leave town, for his father is not very well, and i think dear lucy is
counting the moments till he comes. she wants to take him up to the seat
on the churchyard cliff and show him the beauty of whitby. i daresay it
is the waiting which disturbs her; she will be all right when he
arrives.

       *       *       *       *       *

_27 july._--no news from jonathan. i am getting quite uneasy about him,
though why i should i do not know; but i do wish that he would write, if
it were only a single line. lucy walks more than ever, and each night i
am awakened by her moving about the room. fortunately, the weather is so
hot that she cannot get cold; but still the anxiety and the perpetually
being wakened is beginning to tell on me, and i am getting nervous and
wakeful myself. thank god, lucy’s health keeps up. mr. holmwood has been
suddenly called to ring to see his father, who has been taken seriously
ill. lucy frets at the postponement of seeing him, but it does not touch
her looks; she is a trifle stouter, and her cheeks are a lovely
rose-pink. she has lost that anæmic look which she had. i pray it will
all last.

       *       *       *       *       *

_3 august._--another week gone, and no news from jonathan, not even to
mr. hawkins, from whom i have heard. oh, i do hope he is not ill. he
surely would have written. i look at that last letter of his, but
somehow it does not satisfy me. it does not read like him, and yet it is
his writing. there is no mistake of that. lucy has not walked much in
her sleep the last week, but there is an odd concentration about her
which i do not understand; even in her sleep she seems to be watching
me. she tries the door, and finding it locked, goes about the room
searching for the key.

_6 august._--another three days, and no news. this suspense is getting
dreadful. if i only knew where to write to or where to go to, i should
feel easier; but no one has heard a word of jonathan since that last
letter. i must only pray to god for patience. lucy is more excitable
than ever, but is otherwise well. last night was very threatening, and
the fishermen say that we are in for a storm. i must try to watch it and
learn the weather signs. to-day is a grey day, and the sun as i write is
hidden in thick clouds, high over kettleness. everything is grey--except
the green grass, which seems like emerald amongst it; grey earthy rock;
grey clouds, tinged with the sunburst at the far edge, hang over the
grey sea, into which the sand-points stretch like grey fingers. the sea
is tumbling in over the shallows and the sandy flats with a roar,
muffled in the sea-mists drifting inland. the horizon is lost in a grey
mist. all is vastness; the clouds are piled up like giant rocks, and
there is a “brool” over the sea that sounds like some presage of doom.
dark figures are on the beach here and there, sometimes half shrouded in
the mist, and seem “men like trees walking.” the fishing-boats are
racing for home, and rise and dip in the ground swell as they sweep into
the harbour, bending to the scuppers. here comes old mr. swales. he is
making straight for me, and i can see, by the way he lifts his hat, that
he wants to talk....

i have been quite touched by the change in the poor old man. when he sat
down beside me, he said in a very gentle way:--

“i want to say something to you, miss.” i could see he was not at ease,
so i took his poor old wrinkled hand in mine and asked him to speak
fully; so he said, leaving his hand in mine:--

“i’m afraid, my deary, that i must have shocked you by all the wicked
things i’ve been sayin’ about the dead, and such like, for weeks past;
but i didn’t mean them, and i want ye to remember that when i’m gone. we
aud folks that be daffled, and with one foot abaft the krok-hooal, don’t
altogether like to think of it, and we don’t want to feel scart of it;
an’ that’s why i’ve took to makin’ light of it, so that i’d cheer up my
own heart a bit. but, lord love ye, miss, i ain’t afraid of dyin’, not a
bit; only i don’t want to die if i can help it. my time must be nigh at
hand now, for i be aud, and a hundred years is too much for any man to
expect; and i’m so nigh it that the aud man is already whettin’ his
scythe. ye see, i can’t get out o’ the habit of caffin’ about it all at
once; the chafts will wag as they be used to. some day soon the angel of
death will sound his trumpet for me. but don’t ye dooal an’ greet, my
deary!”--for he saw that i was crying--“if he should come this very
night i’d not refuse to answer his call. for life be, after all, only a
waitin’ for somethin’ else than what we’re doin’; and death be all that
we can rightly depend on. but i’m content, for it’s comin’ to me, my
deary, and comin’ quick. it may be comin’ while we be lookin’ and
wonderin’. maybe it’s in that wind out over the sea that’s bringin’ with
it loss and wreck, and sore distress, and sad hearts. look! look!” he
cried suddenly. “there’s something in that wind and in the hoast beyont
that sounds, and looks, and tastes, and smells like death. it’s in the
air; i feel it comin’. lord, make me answer cheerful when my call
comes!” he held up his arms devoutly, and raised his hat. his mouth
moved as though he were praying. after a few minutes’ silence, he got
up, shook hands with me, and blessed me, and said good-bye, and hobbled
off. it all touched me, and upset me very much.

i was glad when the coastguard came along, with his spy-glass under his
arm. he stopped to talk with me, as he always does, but all the time
kept looking at a strange ship.

“i can’t make her out,” he said; “she’s a russian, by the look of her;
but she’s knocking about in the queerest way. she doesn’t know her mind
a bit; she seems to see the storm coming, but can’t decide whether to
run up north in the open, or to put in here. look there again! she is
steered mighty strangely, for she doesn’t mind the hand on the wheel;
changes about with every puff of wind. we’ll hear more of her before
this time to-morrow.”




chapter vii

cutting from “the dailygraph,” 8 august


(_pasted in mina murray’s journal._)

from a correspondent.

_whitby_.

one of the greatest and suddenest storms on record has just been
experienced here, with results both strange and unique. the weather had
been somewhat sultry, but not to any degree uncommon in the month of
august. saturday evening was as fine as was ever known, and the great
body of holiday-makers laid out yesterday for visits to mulgrave woods,
robin hood’s bay, rig mill, runswick, staithes, and the various trips in
the neighbourhood of whitby. the steamers _emma_ and _scarborough_ made
trips up and down the coast, and there was an unusual amount of
“tripping” both to and from whitby. the day was unusually fine till the
afternoon, when some of the gossips who frequent the east cliff
churchyard, and from that commanding eminence watch the wide sweep of
sea visible to the north and east, called attention to a sudden show of
“mares’-tails” high in the sky to the north-west. the wind was then
blowing from the south-west in the mild degree which in barometrical
language is ranked “no. 2: light breeze.” the coastguard on duty at once
made report, and one old fisherman, who for more than half a century has
kept watch on weather signs from the east cliff, foretold in an emphatic
manner the coming of a sudden storm. the approach of sunset was so very
beautiful, so grand in its masses of splendidly-coloured clouds, that
there was quite an assemblage on the walk along the cliff in the old
churchyard to enjoy the beauty. before the sun dipped below the black
mass of kettleness, standing boldly athwart the western sky, its
downward way was marked by myriad clouds of every sunset-colour--flame,
purple, pink, green, violet, and all the tints of gold; with here and
there masses not large, but of seemingly absolute blackness, in all
sorts of shapes, as well outlined as colossal silhouettes. the
experience was not lost on the painters, and doubtless some of the
sketches of the “prelude to the great storm” will grace the r. a. and r.
i. walls in may next. more than one captain made up his mind then and
there that his “cobble” or his “mule,” as they term the different
classes of boats, would remain in the harbour till the storm had passed.
the wind fell away entirely during the evening, and at midnight there
was a dead calm, a sultry heat, and that prevailing intensity which, on
the approach of thunder, affects persons of a sensitive nature. there
were but few lights in sight at sea, for even the coasting steamers,
which usually “hug” the shore so closely, kept well to seaward, and but
few fishing-boats were in sight. the only sail noticeable was a foreign
schooner with all sails set, which was seemingly going westwards. the
foolhardiness or ignorance of her officers was a prolific theme for
comment whilst she remained in sight, and efforts were made to signal
her to reduce sail in face of her danger. before the night shut down she
was seen with sails idly flapping as she gently rolled on the undulating
swell of the sea,

    “as idle as a painted ship upon a painted ocean.”

shortly before ten o’clock the stillness of the air grew quite
oppressive, and the silence was so marked that the bleating of a sheep
inland or the barking of a dog in the town was distinctly heard, and the
band on the pier, with its lively french air, was like a discord in the
great harmony of nature’s silence. a little after midnight came a
strange sound from over the sea, and high overhead the air began to
carry a strange, faint, hollow booming.

then without warning the tempest broke. with a rapidity which, at the
time, seemed incredible, and even afterwards is impossible to realize,
the whole aspect of nature at once became convulsed. the waves rose in
growing fury, each overtopping its fellow, till in a very few minutes
the lately glassy sea was like a roaring and devouring monster.
white-crested waves beat madly on the level sands and rushed up the
shelving cliffs; others broke over the piers, and with their spume swept
the lanthorns of the lighthouses which rise from the end of either pier
of whitby harbour. the wind roared like thunder, and blew with such
force that it was with difficulty that even strong men kept their feet,
or clung with grim clasp to the iron stanchions. it was found necessary
to clear the entire piers from the mass of onlookers, or else the
fatalities of the night would have been increased manifold. to add to
the difficulties and dangers of the time, masses of sea-fog came
drifting inland--white, wet clouds, which swept by in ghostly fashion,
so dank and damp and cold that it needed but little effort of
imagination to think that the spirits of those lost at sea were
touching their living brethren with the clammy hands of death, and many
a one shuddered as the wreaths of sea-mist swept by. at times the mist
cleared, and the sea for some distance could be seen in the glare of the
lightning, which now came thick and fast, followed by such sudden peals
of thunder that the whole sky overhead seemed trembling under the shock
of the footsteps of the storm.

some of the scenes thus revealed were of immeasurable grandeur and of
absorbing interest--the sea, running mountains high, threw skywards with
each wave mighty masses of white foam, which the tempest seemed to
snatch at and whirl away into space; here and there a fishing-boat, with
a rag of sail, running madly for shelter before the blast; now and again
the white wings of a storm-tossed sea-bird. on the summit of the east
cliff the new searchlight was ready for experiment, but had not yet been
tried. the officers in charge of it got it into working order, and in
the pauses of the inrushing mist swept with it the surface of the sea.
once or twice its service was most effective, as when a fishing-boat,
with gunwale under water, rushed into the harbour, able, by the guidance
of the sheltering light, to avoid the danger of dashing against the
piers. as each boat achieved the safety of the port there was a shout of
joy from the mass of people on shore, a shout which for a moment seemed
to cleave the gale and was then swept away in its rush.

before long the searchlight discovered some distance away a schooner
with all sails set, apparently the same vessel which had been noticed
earlier in the evening. the wind had by this time backed to the east,
and there was a shudder amongst the watchers on the cliff as they
realized the terrible danger in which she now was. between her and the
port lay the great flat reef on which so many good ships have from time
to time suffered, and, with the wind blowing from its present quarter,
it would be quite impossible that she should fetch the entrance of the
harbour. it was now nearly the hour of high tide, but the waves were so
great that in their troughs the shallows of the shore were almost
visible, and the schooner, with all sails set, was rushing with such
speed that, in the words of one old salt, “she must fetch up somewhere,
if it was only in hell.” then came another rush of sea-fog, greater than
any hitherto--a mass of dank mist, which seemed to close on all things
like a grey pall, and left available to men only the organ of hearing,
for the roar of the tempest, and the crash of the thunder, and the
booming of the mighty billows came through the damp oblivion even louder
than before. the rays of the searchlight were kept fixed on the harbour
mouth across the east pier, where the shock was expected, and men waited
breathless. the wind suddenly shifted to the north-east, and the remnant
of the sea-fog melted in the blast; and then, _mirabile dictu_, between
the piers, leaping from wave to wave as it rushed at headlong speed,
swept the strange schooner before the blast, with all sail set, and
gained the safety of the harbour. the searchlight followed her, and a
shudder ran through all who saw her, for lashed to the helm was a
corpse, with drooping head, which swung horribly to and fro at each
motion of the ship. no other form could be seen on deck at all. a great
awe came on all as they realised that the ship, as if by a miracle, had
found the harbour, unsteered save by the hand of a dead man! however,
all took place more quickly than it takes to write these words. the
schooner paused not, but rushing across the harbour, pitched herself on
that accumulation of sand and gravel washed by many tides and many
storms into the south-east corner of the pier jutting under the east
cliff, known locally as tate hill pier.

there was of course a considerable concussion as the vessel drove up on
the sand heap. every spar, rope, and stay was strained, and some of the
“top-hammer” came crashing down. but, strangest of all, the very instant
the shore was touched, an immense dog sprang up on deck from below, as
if shot up by the concussion, and running forward, jumped from the bow
on the sand. making straight for the steep cliff, where the churchyard
hangs over the laneway to the east pier so steeply that some of the flat
tombstones--“thruff-steans” or “through-stones,” as they call them in
the whitby vernacular--actually project over where the sustaining cliff
has fallen away, it disappeared in the darkness, which seemed
intensified just beyond the focus of the searchlight.

it so happened that there was no one at the moment on tate hill pier, as
all those whose houses are in close proximity were either in bed or were
out on the heights above. thus the coastguard on duty on the eastern
side of the harbour, who at once ran down to the little pier, was the
first to climb on board. the men working the searchlight, after scouring
the entrance of the harbour without seeing anything, then turned the
light on the derelict and kept it there. the coastguard ran aft, and
when he came beside the wheel, bent over to examine it, and recoiled at
once as though under some sudden emotion. this seemed to pique general
curiosity, and quite a number of people began to run. it is a good way
round from the west cliff by the drawbridge to tate hill pier, but your
correspondent is a fairly good runner, and came well ahead of the crowd.
when i arrived, however, i found already assembled on the pier a crowd,
whom the coastguard and police refused to allow to come on board. by the
courtesy of the chief boatman, i was, as your correspondent, permitted
to climb on deck, and was one of a small group who saw the dead seaman
whilst actually lashed to the wheel.

it was no wonder that the coastguard was surprised, or even awed, for
not often can such a sight have been seen. the man was simply fastened
by his hands, tied one over the other, to a spoke of the wheel. between
the inner hand and the wood was a crucifix, the set of beads on which it
was fastened being around both wrists and wheel, and all kept fast by
the binding cords. the poor fellow may have been seated at one time, but
the flapping and buffeting of the sails had worked through the rudder of
the wheel and dragged him to and fro, so that the cords with which he
was tied had cut the flesh to the bone. accurate note was made of the
state of things, and a doctor--surgeon j. m. caffyn, of 33, east elliot
place--who came immediately after me, declared, after making
examination, that the man must have been dead for quite two days. in his
pocket was a bottle, carefully corked, empty save for a little roll of
paper, which proved to be the addendum to the log. the coastguard said
the man must have tied up his own hands, fastening the knots with his
teeth. the fact that a coastguard was the first on board may save some
complications, later on, in the admiralty court; for coastguards cannot
claim the salvage which is the right of the first civilian entering on a
derelict. already, however, the legal tongues are wagging, and one young
law student is loudly asserting that the rights of the owner are already
completely sacrificed, his property being held in contravention of the
statutes of mortmain, since the tiller, as emblemship, if not proof, of
delegated possession, is held in a _dead hand_. it is needless to say
that the dead steersman has been reverently removed from the place where
he held his honourable watch and ward till death--a steadfastness as
noble as that of the young casabianca--and placed in the mortuary to
await inquest.

already the sudden storm is passing, and its fierceness is abating;
crowds are scattering homeward, and the sky is beginning to redden over
the yorkshire wolds. i shall send, in time for your next issue, further
details of the derelict ship which found her way so miraculously into
harbour in the storm.

_whitby_

_9 august._--the sequel to the strange arrival of the derelict in the
storm last night is almost more startling than the thing itself. it
turns out that the schooner is a russian from varna, and is called the
_demeter_. she is almost entirely in ballast of silver sand, with only a
small amount of cargo--a number of great wooden boxes filled with mould.
this cargo was consigned to a whitby solicitor, mr. s. f. billington, of
7, the crescent, who this morning went aboard and formally took
possession of the goods consigned to him. the russian consul, too,
acting for the charter-party, took formal possession of the ship, and
paid all harbour dues, etc. nothing is talked about here to-day except
the strange coincidence; the officials of the board of trade have been
most exacting in seeing that every compliance has been made with
existing regulations. as the matter is to be a “nine days’ wonder,” they
are evidently determined that there shall be no cause of after
complaint. a good deal of interest was abroad concerning the dog which
landed when the ship struck, and more than a few of the members of the
s. p. c. a., which is very strong in whitby, have tried to befriend the
animal. to the general disappointment, however, it was not to be found;
it seems to have disappeared entirely from the town. it may be that it
was frightened and made its way on to the moors, where it is still
hiding in terror. there are some who look with dread on such a
possibility, lest later on it should in itself become a danger, for it
is evidently a fierce brute. early this morning a large dog, a half-bred
mastiff belonging to a coal merchant close to tate hill pier, was found
dead in the roadway opposite to its master’s yard. it had been fighting,
and manifestly had had a savage opponent, for its throat was torn away,
and its belly was slit open as if with a savage claw.

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--by the kindness of the board of trade inspector, i have been
permitted to look over the log-book of the _demeter_, which was in order
up to within three days, but contained nothing of special interest
except as to facts of missing men. the greatest interest, however, is
with regard to the paper found in the bottle, which was to-day produced
at the inquest; and a more strange narrative than the two between them
unfold it has not been my lot to come across. as there is no motive for
concealment, i am permitted to use them, and accordingly send you a
rescript, simply omitting technical details of seamanship and
supercargo. it almost seems as though the captain had been seized with
some kind of mania before he had got well into blue water, and that
this had developed persistently throughout the voyage. of course my
statement must be taken _cum grano_, since i am writing from the
dictation of a clerk of the russian consul, who kindly translated for
me, time being short.

                         log of the “demeter.”


_varna to whitby._

_written 18 july, things so strange happening, that i shall keep
accurate note henceforth till we land._

       *       *       *       *       *

on 6 july we finished taking in cargo, silver sand and boxes of earth.
at noon set sail. east wind, fresh. crew, five hands ... two mates,
cook, and myself (captain).

       *       *       *       *       *

on 11 july at dawn entered bosphorus. boarded by turkish customs
officers. backsheesh. all correct. under way at 4 p. m.

       *       *       *       *       *

on 12 july through dardanelles. more customs officers and flagboat of
guarding squadron. backsheesh again. work of officers thorough, but
quick. want us off soon. at dark passed into archipelago.

       *       *       *       *       *

on 13 july passed cape matapan. crew dissatisfied about something.
seemed scared, but would not speak out.

       *       *       *       *       *

on 14 july was somewhat anxious about crew. men all steady fellows, who
sailed with me before. mate could not make out what was wrong; they only
told him there was _something_, and crossed themselves. mate lost temper
with one of them that day and struck him. expected fierce quarrel, but
all was quiet.

       *       *       *       *       *

on 16 july mate reported in the morning that one of crew, petrofsky, was
missing. could not account for it. took larboard watch eight bells last
night; was relieved by abramoff, but did not go to bunk. men more
downcast than ever. all said they expected something of the kind, but
would not say more than there was _something_ aboard. mate getting very
impatient with them; feared some trouble ahead.

       *       *       *       *       *

on 17 july, yesterday, one of the men, olgaren, came to my cabin, and in
an awestruck way confided to me that he thought there was a strange man
aboard the ship. he said that in his watch he had been sheltering
behind the deck-house, as there was a rain-storm, when he saw a tall,
thin man, who was not like any of the crew, come up the companion-way,
and go along the deck forward, and disappear. he followed cautiously,
but when he got to bows found no one, and the hatchways were all closed.
he was in a panic of superstitious fear, and i am afraid the panic may
spread. to allay it, i shall to-day search entire ship carefully from
stem to stern.

       *       *       *       *       *

later in the day i got together the whole crew, and told them, as they
evidently thought there was some one in the ship, we would search from
stem to stern. first mate angry; said it was folly, and to yield to such
foolish ideas would demoralise the men; said he would engage to keep
them out of trouble with a handspike. i let him take the helm, while the
rest began thorough search, all keeping abreast, with lanterns: we left
no corner unsearched. as there were only the big wooden boxes, there
were no odd corners where a man could hide. men much relieved when
search over, and went back to work cheerfully. first mate scowled, but
said nothing.

       *       *       *       *       *

_22 july_.--rough weather last three days, and all hands busy with
sails--no time to be frightened. men seem to have forgotten their dread.
mate cheerful again, and all on good terms. praised men for work in bad
weather. passed gibralter and out through straits. all well.

       *       *       *       *       *

_24 july_.--there seems some doom over this ship. already a hand short,
and entering on the bay of biscay with wild weather ahead, and yet last
night another man lost--disappeared. like the first, he came off his
watch and was not seen again. men all in a panic of fear; sent a round
robin, asking to have double watch, as they fear to be alone. mate
angry. fear there will be some trouble, as either he or the men will do
some violence.

       *       *       *       *       *

_28 july_.--four days in hell, knocking about in a sort of maelstrom,
and the wind a tempest. no sleep for any one. men all worn out. hardly
know how to set a watch, since no one fit to go on. second mate
volunteered to steer and watch, and let men snatch a few hours’ sleep.
wind abating; seas still terrific, but feel them less, as ship is
steadier.

       *       *       *       *       *

_29 july_.--another tragedy. had single watch to-night, as crew too
tired to double. when morning watch came on deck could find no one
except steersman. raised outcry, and all came on deck. thorough search,
but no one found. are now without second mate, and crew in a panic. mate
and i agreed to go armed henceforth and wait for any sign of cause.

       *       *       *       *       *

_30 july_.--last night. rejoiced we are nearing england. weather fine,
all sails set. retired worn out; slept soundly; awaked by mate telling
me that both man of watch and steersman missing. only self and mate and
two hands left to work ship.

       *       *       *       *       *

_1 august_.--two days of fog, and not a sail sighted. had hoped when in
the english channel to be able to signal for help or get in somewhere.
not having power to work sails, have to run before wind. dare not lower,
as could not raise them again. we seem to be drifting to some terrible
doom. mate now more demoralised than either of men. his stronger nature
seems to have worked inwardly against himself. men are beyond fear,
working stolidly and patiently, with minds made up to worst. they are
russian, he roumanian.

       *       *       *       *       *

_2 august, midnight_.--woke up from few minutes’ sleep by hearing a cry,
seemingly outside my port. could see nothing in fog. rushed on deck, and
ran against mate. tells me heard cry and ran, but no sign of man on
watch. one more gone. lord, help us! mate says we must be past straits
of dover, as in a moment of fog lifting he saw north foreland, just as
he heard the man cry out. if so we are now off in the north sea, and
only god can guide us in the fog, which seems to move with us; and god
seems to have deserted us.

       *       *       *       *       *

_3 august_.--at midnight i went to relieve the man at the wheel, and
when i got to it found no one there. the wind was steady, and as we ran
before it there was no yawing. i dared not leave it, so shouted for the
mate. after a few seconds he rushed up on deck in his flannels. he
looked wild-eyed and haggard, and i greatly fear his reason has given
way. he came close to me and whispered hoarsely, with his mouth to my
ear, as though fearing the very air might hear: “_it_ is here; i know
it, now. on the watch last night i saw it, like a man, tall and thin,
and ghastly pale. it was in the bows, and looking out. i crept behind
it, and gave it my knife; but the knife went through it, empty as the
air.” and as he spoke he took his knife and drove it savagely into
space. then he went on: “but it is here, and i’ll find it. it is in the
hold, perhaps in one of those boxes. i’ll unscrew them one by one and
see. you work the helm.” and, with a warning look and his finger on his
lip, he went below. there was springing up a choppy wind, and i could
not leave the helm. i saw him come out on deck again with a tool-chest
and a lantern, and go down the forward hatchway. he is mad, stark,
raving mad, and it’s no use my trying to stop him. he can’t hurt those
big boxes: they are invoiced as “clay,” and to pull them about is as
harmless a thing as he can do. so here i stay, and mind the helm, and
write these notes. i can only trust in god and wait till the fog clears.
then, if i can’t steer to any harbour with the wind that is, i shall cut
down sails and lie by, and signal for help....

       *       *       *       *       *

it is nearly all over now. just as i was beginning to hope that the mate
would come out calmer--for i heard him knocking away at something in the
hold, and work is good for him--there came up the hatchway a sudden,
startled scream, which made my blood run cold, and up on the deck he
came as if shot from a gun--a raging madman, with his eyes rolling and
his face convulsed with fear. “save me! save me!” he cried, and then
looked round on the blanket of fog. his horror turned to despair, and in
a steady voice he said: “you had better come too, captain, before it is
too late. _he_ is there. i know the secret now. the sea will save me
from him, and it is all that is left!” before i could say a word, or
move forward to seize him, he sprang on the bulwark and deliberately
threw himself into the sea. i suppose i know the secret too, now. it was
this madman who had got rid of the men one by one, and now he has
followed them himself. god help me! how am i to account for all these
horrors when i get to port? _when_ i get to port! will that ever be?

       *       *       *       *       *

_4 august._--still fog, which the sunrise cannot pierce. i know there is
sunrise because i am a sailor, why else i know not. i dared not go
below, i dared not leave the helm; so here all night i stayed, and in
the dimness of the night i saw it--him! god forgive me, but the mate was
right to jump overboard. it was better to die like a man; to die like a
sailor in blue water no man can object. but i am captain, and i must not
leave my ship. but i shall baffle this fiend or monster, for i shall tie
my hands to the wheel when my strength begins to fail, and along with
them i shall tie that which he--it!--dare not touch; and then, come good
wind or foul, i shall save my soul, and my honour as a captain. i am
growing weaker, and the night is coming on. if he can look me in the
face again, i may not have time to act.... if we are wrecked, mayhap
this bottle may be found, and those who find it may understand; if not,
... well, then all men shall know that i have been true to my trust. god
and the blessed virgin and the saints help a poor ignorant soul trying
to do his duty....

       *       *       *       *       *

of course the verdict was an open one. there is no evidence to adduce;
and whether or not the man himself committed the murders there is now
none to say. the folk here hold almost universally that the captain is
simply a hero, and he is to be given a public funeral. already it is
arranged that his body is to be taken with a train of boats up the esk
for a piece and then brought back to tate hill pier and up the abbey
steps; for he is to be buried in the churchyard on the cliff. the owners
of more than a hundred boats have already given in their names as
wishing to follow him to the grave.

no trace has ever been found of the great dog; at which there is much
mourning, for, with public opinion in its present state, he would, i
believe, be adopted by the town. to-morrow will see the funeral; and so
will end this one more “mystery of the sea.”


_mina murray’s journal._

_8 august._--lucy was very restless all night, and i, too, could not
sleep. the storm was fearful, and as it boomed loudly among the
chimney-pots, it made me shudder. when a sharp puff came it seemed to be
like a distant gun. strangely enough, lucy did not wake; but she got up
twice and dressed herself. fortunately, each time i awoke in time and
managed to undress her without waking her, and got her back to bed. it
is a very strange thing, this sleep-walking, for as soon as her will is
thwarted in any physical way, her intention, if there be any,
disappears, and she yields herself almost exactly to the routine of her
life.

early in the morning we both got up and went down to the harbour to see
if anything had happened in the night. there were very few people about,
and though the sun was bright, and the air clear and fresh, the big,
grim-looking waves, that seemed dark themselves because the foam that
topped them was like snow, forced themselves in through the narrow mouth
of the harbour--like a bullying man going through a crowd. somehow i
felt glad that jonathan was not on the sea last night, but on land. but,
oh, is he on land or sea? where is he, and how? i am getting fearfully
anxious about him. if i only knew what to do, and could do anything!

       *       *       *       *       *

_10 august._--the funeral of the poor sea-captain to-day was most
touching. every boat in the harbour seemed to be there, and the coffin
was carried by captains all the way from tate hill pier up to the
churchyard. lucy came with me, and we went early to our old seat, whilst
the cortège of boats went up the river to the viaduct and came down
again. we had a lovely view, and saw the procession nearly all the way.
the poor fellow was laid to rest quite near our seat so that we stood on
it when the time came and saw everything. poor lucy seemed much upset.
she was restless and uneasy all the time, and i cannot but think that
her dreaming at night is telling on her. she is quite odd in one thing:
she will not admit to me that there is any cause for restlessness; or if
there be, she does not understand it herself. there is an additional
cause in that poor old mr. swales was found dead this morning on our
seat, his neck being broken. he had evidently, as the doctor said,
fallen back in the seat in some sort of fright, for there was a look of
fear and horror on his face that the men said made them shudder. poor
dear old man! perhaps he had seen death with his dying eyes! lucy is so
sweet and sensitive that she feels influences more acutely than other
people do. just now she was quite upset by a little thing which i did
not much heed, though i am myself very fond of animals. one of the men
who came up here often to look for the boats was followed by his dog.
the dog is always with him. they are both quiet persons, and i never saw
the man angry, nor heard the dog bark. during the service the dog would
not come to its master, who was on the seat with us, but kept a few
yards off, barking and howling. its master spoke to it gently, and then
harshly, and then angrily; but it would neither come nor cease to make a
noise. it was in a sort of fury, with its eyes savage, and all its hairs
bristling out like a cat’s tail when puss is on the war-path. finally
the man, too, got angry, and jumped down and kicked the dog, and then
took it by the scruff of the neck and half dragged and half threw it on
the tombstone on which the seat is fixed. the moment it touched the
stone the poor thing became quiet and fell all into a tremble. it did
not try to get away, but crouched down, quivering and cowering, and was
in such a pitiable state of terror that i tried, though without effect,
to comfort it. lucy was full of pity, too, but she did not attempt to
touch the dog, but looked at it in an agonised sort of way. i greatly
fear that she is of too super-sensitive a nature to go through the world
without trouble. she will be dreaming of this to-night, i am sure. the
whole agglomeration of things--the ship steered into port by a dead
man; his attitude, tied to the wheel with a crucifix and beads; the
touching funeral; the dog, now furious and now in terror--will all
afford material for her dreams.

i think it will be best for her to go to bed tired out physically, so i
shall take her for a long walk by the cliffs to robin hood’s bay and
back. she ought not to have much inclination for sleep-walking then.




chapter viii

mina murray’s journal


_same day, 11 o’clock p. m._--oh, but i am tired! if it were not that i
had made my diary a duty i should not open it to-night. we had a lovely
walk. lucy, after a while, was in gay spirits, owing, i think, to some
dear cows who came nosing towards us in a field close to the lighthouse,
and frightened the wits out of us. i believe we forgot everything
except, of course, personal fear, and it seemed to wipe the slate clean
and give us a fresh start. we had a capital “severe tea” at robin hood’s
bay in a sweet little old-fashioned inn, with a bow-window right over
the seaweed-covered rocks of the strand. i believe we should have
shocked the “new woman” with our appetites. men are more tolerant, bless
them! then we walked home with some, or rather many, stoppages to rest,
and with our hearts full of a constant dread of wild bulls. lucy was
really tired, and we intended to creep off to bed as soon as we could.
the young curate came in, however, and mrs. westenra asked him to stay
for supper. lucy and i had both a fight for it with the dusty miller; i
know it was a hard fight on my part, and i am quite heroic. i think that
some day the bishops must get together and see about breeding up a new
class of curates, who don’t take supper, no matter how they may be
pressed to, and who will know when girls are tired. lucy is asleep and
breathing softly. she has more colour in her cheeks than usual, and
looks, oh, so sweet. if mr. holmwood fell in love with her seeing her
only in the drawing-room, i wonder what he would say if he saw her now.
some of the “new women” writers will some day start an idea that men and
women should be allowed to see each other asleep before proposing or
accepting. but i suppose the new woman won’t condescend in future to
accept; she will do the proposing herself. and a nice job she will make
of it, too! there’s some consolation in that. i am so happy to-night,
because dear lucy seems better. i really believe she has turned the
corner, and that we are over her troubles with dreaming. i should be
quite happy if i only knew if jonathan.... god bless and keep him.

       *       *       *       *       *

_11 august, 3 a. m._--diary again. no sleep now, so i may as well write.
i am too agitated to sleep. we have had such an adventure, such an
agonising experience. i fell asleep as soon as i had closed my diary....
suddenly i became broad awake, and sat up, with a horrible sense of fear
upon me, and of some feeling of emptiness around me. the room was dark,
so i could not see lucy’s bed; i stole across and felt for her. the bed
was empty. i lit a match and found that she was not in the room. the
door was shut, but not locked, as i had left it. i feared to wake her
mother, who has been more than usually ill lately, so threw on some
clothes and got ready to look for her. as i was leaving the room it
struck me that the clothes she wore might give me some clue to her
dreaming intention. dressing-gown would mean house; dress, outside.
dressing-gown and dress were both in their places. “thank god,” i said
to myself, “she cannot be far, as she is only in her nightdress.” i ran
downstairs and looked in the sitting-room. not there! then i looked in
all the other open rooms of the house, with an ever-growing fear
chilling my heart. finally i came to the hall door and found it open. it
was not wide open, but the catch of the lock had not caught. the people
of the house are careful to lock the door every night, so i feared that
lucy must have gone out as she was. there was no time to think of what
might happen; a vague, overmastering fear obscured all details. i took a
big, heavy shawl and ran out. the clock was striking one as i was in the
crescent, and there was not a soul in sight. i ran along the north
terrace, but could see no sign of the white figure which i expected. at
the edge of the west cliff above the pier i looked across the harbour to
the east cliff, in the hope or fear--i don’t know which--of seeing lucy
in our favourite seat. there was a bright full moon, with heavy black,
driving clouds, which threw the whole scene into a fleeting diorama of
light and shade as they sailed across. for a moment or two i could see
nothing, as the shadow of a cloud obscured st. mary’s church and all
around it. then as the cloud passed i could see the ruins of the abbey
coming into view; and as the edge of a narrow band of light as sharp as
a sword-cut moved along, the church and the churchyard became gradually
visible. whatever my expectation was, it was not disappointed, for
there, on our favourite seat, the silver light of the moon struck a
half-reclining figure, snowy white. the coming of the cloud was too
quick for me to see much, for shadow shut down on light almost
immediately; but it seemed to me as though something dark stood behind
the seat where the white figure shone, and bent over it. what it was,
whether man or beast, i could not tell; i did not wait to catch another
glance, but flew down the steep steps to the pier and along by the
fish-market to the bridge, which was the only way to reach the east
cliff. the town seemed as dead, for not a soul did i see; i rejoiced
that it was so, for i wanted no witness of poor lucy’s condition. the
time and distance seemed endless, and my knees trembled and my breath
came laboured as i toiled up the endless steps to the abbey. i must have
gone fast, and yet it seemed to me as if my feet were weighted with
lead, and as though every joint in my body were rusty. when i got almost
to the top i could see the seat and the white figure, for i was now
close enough to distinguish it even through the spells of shadow. there
was undoubtedly something, long and black, bending over the
half-reclining white figure. i called in fright, “lucy! lucy!” and
something raised a head, and from where i was i could see a white face
and red, gleaming eyes. lucy did not answer, and i ran on to the
entrance of the churchyard. as i entered, the church was between me and
the seat, and for a minute or so i lost sight of her. when i came in
view again the cloud had passed, and the moonlight struck so brilliantly
that i could see lucy half reclining with her head lying over the back
of the seat. she was quite alone, and there was not a sign of any living
thing about.

when i bent over her i could see that she was still asleep. her lips
were parted, and she was breathing--not softly as usual with her, but in
long, heavy gasps, as though striving to get her lungs full at every
breath. as i came close, she put up her hand in her sleep and pulled the
collar of her nightdress close around her throat. whilst she did so
there came a little shudder through her, as though she felt the cold. i
flung the warm shawl over her, and drew the edges tight round her neck,
for i dreaded lest she should get some deadly chill from the night air,
unclad as she was. i feared to wake her all at once, so, in order to
have my hands free that i might help her, i fastened the shawl at her
throat with a big safety-pin; but i must have been clumsy in my anxiety
and pinched or pricked her with it, for by-and-by, when her breathing
became quieter, she put her hand to her throat again and moaned. when i
had her carefully wrapped up i put my shoes on her feet and then began
very gently to wake her. at first she did not respond; but gradually she
became more and more uneasy in her sleep, moaning and sighing
occasionally. at last, as time was passing fast, and, for many other
reasons, i wished to get her home at once, i shook her more forcibly,
till finally she opened her eyes and awoke. she did not seem surprised
to see me, as, of course, she did not realise all at once where she was.
lucy always wakes prettily, and even at such a time, when her body must
have been chilled with cold, and her mind somewhat appalled at waking
unclad in a churchyard at night, she did not lose her grace. she
trembled a little, and clung to me; when i told her to come at once with
me home she rose without a word, with the obedience of a child. as we
passed along, the gravel hurt my feet, and lucy noticed me wince. she
stopped and wanted to insist upon my taking my shoes; but i would not.
however, when we got to the pathway outside the churchyard, where there
was a puddle of water, remaining from the storm, i daubed my feet with
mud, using each foot in turn on the other, so that as we went home, no
one, in case we should meet any one, should notice my bare feet.

fortune favoured us, and we got home without meeting a soul. once we saw
a man, who seemed not quite sober, passing along a street in front of
us; but we hid in a door till he had disappeared up an opening such as
there are here, steep little closes, or “wynds,” as they call them in
scotland. my heart beat so loud all the time that sometimes i thought i
should faint. i was filled with anxiety about lucy, not only for her
health, lest she should suffer from the exposure, but for her reputation
in case the story should get wind. when we got in, and had washed our
feet, and had said a prayer of thankfulness together, i tucked her into
bed. before falling asleep she asked--even implored--me not to say a
word to any one, even her mother, about her sleep-walking adventure. i
hesitated at first to promise; but on thinking of the state of her
mother’s health, and how the knowledge of such a thing would fret her,
and thinking, too, of how such a story might become distorted--nay,
infallibly would--in case it should leak out, i thought it wiser to do
so. i hope i did right. i have locked the door, and the key is tied to
my wrist, so perhaps i shall not be again disturbed. lucy is sleeping
soundly; the reflex of the dawn is high and far over the sea....

       *       *       *       *       *

_same day, noon._--all goes well. lucy slept till i woke her and seemed
not to have even changed her side. the adventure of the night does not
seem to have harmed her; on the contrary, it has benefited her, for she
looks better this morning than she has done for weeks. i was sorry to
notice that my clumsiness with the safety-pin hurt her. indeed, it might
have been serious, for the skin of her throat was pierced. i must have
pinched up a piece of loose skin and have transfixed it, for there are
two little red points like pin-pricks, and on the band of her nightdress
was a drop of blood. when i apologised and was concerned about it, she
laughed and petted me, and said she did not even feel it. fortunately it
cannot leave a scar, as it is so tiny.

       *       *       *       *       *

_same day, night._--we passed a happy day. the air was clear, and the
sun bright, and there was a cool breeze. we took our lunch to mulgrave
woods, mrs. westenra driving by the road and lucy and i walking by the
cliff-path and joining her at the gate. i felt a little sad myself, for
i could not but feel how _absolutely_ happy it would have been had
jonathan been with me. but there! i must only be patient. in the evening
we strolled in the casino terrace, and heard some good music by spohr
and mackenzie, and went to bed early. lucy seems more restful than she
has been for some time, and fell asleep at once. i shall lock the door
and secure the key the same as before, though i do not expect any
trouble to-night.

       *       *       *       *       *

_12 august._--my expectations were wrong, for twice during the night i
was wakened by lucy trying to get out. she seemed, even in her sleep, to
be a little impatient at finding the door shut, and went back to bed
under a sort of protest. i woke with the dawn, and heard the birds
chirping outside of the window. lucy woke, too, and, i was glad to see,
was even better than on the previous morning. all her old gaiety of
manner seemed to have come back, and she came and snuggled in beside me
and told me all about arthur. i told her how anxious i was about
jonathan, and then she tried to comfort me. well, she succeeded
somewhat, for, though sympathy can’t alter facts, it can help to make
them more bearable.

       *       *       *       *       *

_13 august._--another quiet day, and to bed with the key on my wrist as
before. again i awoke in the night, and found lucy sitting up in bed,
still asleep, pointing to the window. i got up quietly, and pulling
aside the blind, looked out. it was brilliant moonlight, and the soft
effect of the light over the sea and sky--merged together in one great,
silent mystery--was beautiful beyond words. between me and the moonlight
flitted a great bat, coming and going in great whirling circles. once or
twice it came quite close, but was, i suppose, frightened at seeing me,
and flitted away across the harbour towards the abbey. when i came back
from the window lucy had lain down again, and was sleeping peacefully.
she did not stir again all night.

       *       *       *       *       *

_14 august._--on the east cliff, reading and writing all day. lucy seems
to have become as much in love with the spot as i am, and it is hard to
get her away from it when it is time to come home for lunch or tea or
dinner. this afternoon she made a funny remark. we were coming home for
dinner, and had come to the top of the steps up from the west pier and
stopped to look at the view, as we generally do. the setting sun, low
down in the sky, was just dropping behind kettleness; the red light was
thrown over on the east cliff and the old abbey, and seemed to bathe
everything in a beautiful rosy glow. we were silent for a while, and
suddenly lucy murmured as if to herself:--

“his red eyes again! they are just the same.” it was such an odd
expression, coming _apropos_ of nothing, that it quite startled me. i
slewed round a little, so as to see lucy well without seeming to stare
at her, and saw that she was in a half-dreamy state, with an odd look on
her face that i could not quite make out; so i said nothing, but
followed her eyes. she appeared to be looking over at our own seat,
whereon was a dark figure seated alone. i was a little startled myself,
for it seemed for an instant as if the stranger had great eyes like
burning flames; but a second look dispelled the illusion. the red
sunlight was shining on the windows of st. mary’s church behind our
seat, and as the sun dipped there was just sufficient change in the
refraction and reflection to make it appear as if the light moved. i
called lucy’s attention to the peculiar effect, and she became herself
with a start, but she looked sad all the same; it may have been that she
was thinking of that terrible night up there. we never refer to it; so i
said nothing, and we went home to dinner. lucy had a headache and went
early to bed. i saw her asleep, and went out for a little stroll myself;
i walked along the cliffs to the westward, and was full of sweet
sadness, for i was thinking of jonathan. when coming home--it was then
bright moonlight, so bright that, though the front of our part of the
crescent was in shadow, everything could be well seen--i threw a glance
up at our window, and saw lucy’s head leaning out. i thought that
perhaps she was looking out for me, so i opened my handkerchief and
waved it. she did not notice or make any movement whatever. just then,
the moonlight crept round an angle of the building, and the light fell
on the window. there distinctly was lucy with her head lying up against
the side of the window-sill and her eyes shut. she was fast asleep, and
by her, seated on the window-sill, was something that looked like a
good-sized bird. i was afraid she might get a chill, so i ran upstairs,
but as i came into the room she was moving back to her bed, fast
asleep, and breathing heavily; she was holding her hand to her throat,
as though to protect it from cold.

i did not wake her, but tucked her up warmly; i have taken care that the
door is locked and the window securely fastened.

she looks so sweet as she sleeps; but she is paler than is her wont, and
there is a drawn, haggard look under her eyes which i do not like. i
fear she is fretting about something. i wish i could find out what it
is.

       *       *       *       *       *

_15 august._--rose later than usual. lucy was languid and tired, and
slept on after we had been called. we had a happy surprise at breakfast.
arthur’s father is better, and wants the marriage to come off soon. lucy
is full of quiet joy, and her mother is glad and sorry at once. later on
in the day she told me the cause. she is grieved to lose lucy as her
very own, but she is rejoiced that she is soon to have some one to
protect her. poor dear, sweet lady! she confided to me that she has got
her death-warrant. she has not told lucy, and made me promise secrecy;
her doctor told her that within a few months, at most, she must die, for
her heart is weakening. at any time, even now, a sudden shock would be
almost sure to kill her. ah, we were wise to keep from her the affair of
the dreadful night of lucy’s sleep-walking.

       *       *       *       *       *

_17 august._--no diary for two whole days. i have not had the heart to
write. some sort of shadowy pall seems to be coming over our happiness.
no news from jonathan, and lucy seems to be growing weaker, whilst her
mother’s hours are numbering to a close. i do not understand lucy’s
fading away as she is doing. she eats well and sleeps well, and enjoys
the fresh air; but all the time the roses in her cheeks are fading, and
she gets weaker and more languid day by day; at night i hear her gasping
as if for air. i keep the key of our door always fastened to my wrist at
night, but she gets up and walks about the room, and sits at the open
window. last night i found her leaning out when i woke up, and when i
tried to wake her i could not; she was in a faint. when i managed to
restore her she was as weak as water, and cried silently between long,
painful struggles for breath. when i asked her how she came to be at the
window she shook her head and turned away. i trust her feeling ill may
not be from that unlucky prick of the safety-pin. i looked at her throat
just now as she lay asleep, and the tiny wounds seem not to have healed.
they are still open, and, if anything, larger than before, and the
edges of them are faintly white. they are like little white dots with
red centres. unless they heal within a day or two, i shall insist on the
doctor seeing about them.


_letter, samuel f. billington & son, solicitors, whitby, to messrs.
carter, paterson & co., london._

“_17 august._

“dear sirs,--

“herewith please receive invoice of goods sent by great northern
railway. same are to be delivered at carfax, near purfleet, immediately
on receipt at goods station king’s cross. the house is at present empty,
but enclosed please find keys, all of which are labelled.

“you will please deposit the boxes, fifty in number, which form the
consignment, in the partially ruined building forming part of the house
and marked ‘a’ on rough diagram enclosed. your agent will easily
recognise the locality, as it is the ancient chapel of the mansion. the
goods leave by the train at 9:30 to-night, and will be due at king’s
cross at 4:30 to-morrow afternoon. as our client wishes the delivery
made as soon as possible, we shall be obliged by your having teams ready
at king’s cross at the time named and forthwith conveying the goods to
destination. in order to obviate any delays possible through any routine
requirements as to payment in your departments, we enclose cheque
herewith for ten pounds (£10), receipt of which please acknowledge.
should the charge be less than this amount, you can return balance; if
greater, we shall at once send cheque for difference on hearing from
you. you are to leave the keys on coming away in the main hall of the
house, where the proprietor may get them on his entering the house by
means of his duplicate key.

“pray do not take us as exceeding the bounds of business courtesy in
pressing you in all ways to use the utmost expedition.

_“we are, dear sirs,

“faithfully yours,

“samuel f. billington & son.”_


_letter, messrs. carter, paterson & co., london, to messrs. billington &
son, whitby._

“_21 august._

“dear sirs,--

“we beg to acknowledge £10 received and to return cheque £1 17s. 9d,
amount of overplus, as shown in receipted account herewith. goods are
delivered in exact accordance with instructions, and keys left in parcel
in main hall, as directed.

“we are, dear sirs,

“yours respectfully.

“_pro_ carter, paterson & co.”


_mina murray’s journal._

_18 august._--i am happy to-day, and write sitting on the seat in the
churchyard. lucy is ever so much better. last night she slept well all
night, and did not disturb me once. the roses seem coming back already
to her cheeks, though she is still sadly pale and wan-looking. if she
were in any way anæmic i could understand it, but she is not. she is in
gay spirits and full of life and cheerfulness. all the morbid reticence
seems to have passed from her, and she has just reminded me, as if i
needed any reminding, of _that_ night, and that it was here, on this
very seat, i found her asleep. as she told me she tapped playfully with
the heel of her boot on the stone slab and said:--

“my poor little feet didn’t make much noise then! i daresay poor old mr.
swales would have told me that it was because i didn’t want to wake up
geordie.” as she was in such a communicative humour, i asked her if she
had dreamed at all that night. before she answered, that sweet, puckered
look came into her forehead, which arthur--i call him arthur from her
habit--says he loves; and, indeed, i don’t wonder that he does. then she
went on in a half-dreaming kind of way, as if trying to recall it to
herself:--

“i didn’t quite dream; but it all seemed to be real. i only wanted to be
here in this spot--i don’t know why, for i was afraid of something--i
don’t know what. i remember, though i suppose i was asleep, passing
through the streets and over the bridge. a fish leaped as i went by, and
i leaned over to look at it, and i heard a lot of dogs howling--the
whole town seemed as if it must be full of dogs all howling at once--as
i went up the steps. then i had a vague memory of something long and
dark with red eyes, just as we saw in the sunset, and something very
sweet and very bitter all around me at once; and then i seemed sinking
into deep green water, and there was a singing in my ears, as i have
heard there is to drowning men; and then everything seemed passing away
from me; my soul seemed to go out from my body and float about the air.
i seem to remember that once the west lighthouse was right under me,
and then there was a sort of agonising feeling, as if i were in an
earthquake, and i came back and found you shaking my body. i saw you do
it before i felt you.”

then she began to laugh. it seemed a little uncanny to me, and i
listened to her breathlessly. i did not quite like it, and thought it
better not to keep her mind on the subject, so we drifted on to other
subjects, and lucy was like her old self again. when we got home the
fresh breeze had braced her up, and her pale cheeks were really more
rosy. her mother rejoiced when she saw her, and we all spent a very
happy evening together.

       *       *       *       *       *

_19 august._--joy, joy, joy! although not all joy. at last, news of
jonathan. the dear fellow has been ill; that is why he did not write. i
am not afraid to think it or say it, now that i know. mr. hawkins sent
me on the letter, and wrote himself, oh, so kindly. i am to leave in the
morning and go over to jonathan, and to help to nurse him if necessary,
and to bring him home. mr. hawkins says it would not be a bad thing if
we were to be married out there. i have cried over the good sister’s
letter till i can feel it wet against my bosom, where it lies. it is of
jonathan, and must be next my heart, for he is _in_ my heart. my journey
is all mapped out, and my luggage ready. i am only taking one change of
dress; lucy will bring my trunk to london and keep it till i send for
it, for it may be that ... i must write no more; i must keep it to say
to jonathan, my husband. the letter that he has seen and touched must
comfort me till we meet.


_letter, sister agatha, hospital of st. joseph and ste. mary,
buda-pesth, to miss wilhelmina murray._

“_12 august._

“dear madam,--

“i write by desire of mr. jonathan harker, who is himself not strong
enough to write, though progressing well, thanks to god and st. joseph
and ste. mary. he has been under our care for nearly six weeks,
suffering from a violent brain fever. he wishes me to convey his love,
and to say that by this post i write for him to mr. peter hawkins,
exeter, to say, with his dutiful respects, that he is sorry for his
delay, and that all of his work is completed. he will require some few
weeks’ rest in our sanatorium in the hills, but will then return. he
wishes me to say that he has not sufficient money with him, and that he
would like to pay for his staying here, so that others who need shall
not be wanting for help.

“believe me,

“yours, with sympathy and all blessings,

“sister agatha.

“p. s.--my patient being asleep, i open this to let you know something
more. he has told me all about you, and that you are shortly to be his
wife. all blessings to you both! he has had some fearful shock--so says
our doctor--and in his delirium his ravings have been dreadful; of
wolves and poison and blood; of ghosts and demons; and i fear to say of
what. be careful with him always that there may be nothing to excite him
of this kind for a long time to come; the traces of such an illness as
his do not lightly die away. we should have written long ago, but we
knew nothing of his friends, and there was on him nothing that any one
could understand. he came in the train from klausenburg, and the guard
was told by the station-master there that he rushed into the station
shouting for a ticket for home. seeing from his violent demeanour that
he was english, they gave him a ticket for the furthest station on the
way thither that the train reached.

“be assured that he is well cared for. he has won all hearts by his
sweetness and gentleness. he is truly getting on well, and i have no
doubt will in a few weeks be all himself. but be careful of him for
safety’s sake. there are, i pray god and st. joseph and ste. mary, many,
many, happy years for you both.”


_dr. seward’s diary._

_19 august._--strange and sudden change in renfield last night. about
eight o’clock he began to get excited and sniff about as a dog does when
setting. the attendant was struck by his manner, and knowing my interest
in him, encouraged him to talk. he is usually respectful to the
attendant and at times servile; but to-night, the man tells me, he was
quite haughty. would not condescend to talk with him at all. all he
would say was:--

     “i don’t want to talk to you: you don’t count now; the master is at
     hand.”

the attendant thinks it is some sudden form of religious mania which has
seized him. if so, we must look out for squalls, for a strong man with
homicidal and religious mania at once might be dangerous. the
combination is a dreadful one. at nine o’clock i visited him myself. his
attitude to me was the same as that to the attendant; in his sublime
self-feeling the difference between myself and attendant seemed to him
as nothing. it looks like religious mania, and he will soon think that
he himself is god. these infinitesimal distinctions between man and man
are too paltry for an omnipotent being. how these madmen give themselves
away! the real god taketh heed lest a sparrow fall; but the god created
from human vanity sees no difference between an eagle and a sparrow. oh,
if men only knew!

for half an hour or more renfield kept getting excited in greater and
greater degree. i did not pretend to be watching him, but i kept strict
observation all the same. all at once that shifty look came into his
eyes which we always see when a madman has seized an idea, and with it
the shifty movement of the head and back which asylum attendants come to
know so well. he became quite quiet, and went and sat on the edge of his
bed resignedly, and looked into space with lack-lustre eyes. i thought i
would find out if his apathy were real or only assumed, and tried to
lead him to talk of his pets, a theme which had never failed to excite
his attention. at first he made no reply, but at length said testily:--

“bother them all! i don’t care a pin about them.”

“what?” i said. “you don’t mean to tell me you don’t care about
spiders?” (spiders at present are his hobby and the note-book is filling
up with columns of small figures.) to this he answered enigmatically:--

“the bride-maidens rejoice the eyes that wait the coming of the bride;
but when the bride draweth nigh, then the maidens shine not to the eyes
that are filled.”

he would not explain himself, but remained obstinately seated on his bed
all the time i remained with him.

i am weary to-night and low in spirits. i cannot but think of lucy, and
how different things might have been. if i don’t sleep at once, chloral,
the modern morpheus--c_{2}hcl_{3}o. h_{2}o! i must be careful not to let
it grow into a habit. no, i shall take none to-night! i have thought of
lucy, and i shall not dishonour her by mixing the two. if need be,
to-night shall be sleepless....

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--glad i made the resolution; gladder that i kept to it. i had
lain tossing about, and had heard the clock strike only twice, when the
night-watchman came to me, sent up from the ward, to say that renfield
had escaped. i threw on my clothes and ran down at once; my patient is
too dangerous a person to be roaming about. those ideas of his might
work out dangerously with strangers. the attendant was waiting for me.
he said he had seen him not ten minutes before, seemingly asleep in his
bed, when he had looked through the observation-trap in the door. his
attention was called by the sound of the window being wrenched out. he
ran back and saw his feet disappear through the window, and had at once
sent up for me. he was only in his night-gear, and cannot be far off.
the attendant thought it would be more useful to watch where he should
go than to follow him, as he might lose sight of him whilst getting out
of the building by the door. he is a bulky man, and couldn’t get through
the window. i am thin, so, with his aid, i got out, but feet foremost,
and, as we were only a few feet above ground, landed unhurt. the
attendant told me the patient had gone to the left, and had taken a
straight line, so i ran as quickly as i could. as i got through the belt
of trees i saw a white figure scale the high wall which separates our
grounds from those of the deserted house.

i ran back at once, told the watchman to get three or four men
immediately and follow me into the grounds of carfax, in case our friend
might be dangerous. i got a ladder myself, and crossing the wall,
dropped down on the other side. i could see renfield’s figure just
disappearing behind the angle of the house, so i ran after him. on the
far side of the house i found him pressed close against the old
ironbound oak door of the chapel. he was talking, apparently to some
one, but i was afraid to go near enough to hear what he was saying, lest
i might frighten him, and he should run off. chasing an errant swarm of
bees is nothing to following a naked lunatic, when the fit of escaping
is upon him! after a few minutes, however, i could see that he did not
take note of anything around him, and so ventured to draw nearer to
him--the more so as my men had now crossed the wall and were closing him
in. i heard him say:--

“i am here to do your bidding, master. i am your slave, and you will
reward me, for i shall be faithful. i have worshipped you long and afar
off. now that you are near, i await your commands, and you will not pass
me by, will you, dear master, in your distribution of good things?”

he _is_ a selfish old beggar anyhow. he thinks of the loaves and fishes
even when he believes he is in a real presence. his manias make a
startling combination. when we closed in on him he fought like a tiger.
he is immensely strong, for he was more like a wild beast than a man. i
never saw a lunatic in such a paroxysm of rage before; and i hope i
shall not again. it is a mercy that we have found out his strength and
his danger in good time. with strength and determination like his, he
might have done wild work before he was caged. he is safe now at any
rate. jack sheppard himself couldn’t get free from the strait-waistcoat
that keeps him restrained, and he’s chained to the wall in the padded
room. his cries are at times awful, but the silences that follow are
more deadly still, for he means murder in every turn and movement.

just now he spoke coherent words for the first time:--

“i shall be patient, master. it is coming--coming--coming!”

so i took the hint, and came too. i was too excited to sleep, but this
diary has quieted me, and i feel i shall get some sleep to-night.




chapter ix


_letter, mina harker to lucy westenra._

“_buda-pesth, 24 august._

“my dearest lucy,--

“i know you will be anxious to hear all that has happened since we
parted at the railway station at whitby. well, my dear, i got to hull
all right, and caught the boat to hamburg, and then the train on here. i
feel that i can hardly recall anything of the journey, except that i
knew i was coming to jonathan, and, that as i should have to do some
nursing, i had better get all the sleep i could.... i found my dear one,
oh, so thin and pale and weak-looking. all the resolution has gone out
of his dear eyes, and that quiet dignity which i told you was in his
face has vanished. he is only a wreck of himself, and he does not
remember anything that has happened to him for a long time past. at
least, he wants me to believe so, and i shall never ask. he has had some
terrible shock, and i fear it might tax his poor brain if he were to try
to recall it. sister agatha, who is a good creature and a born nurse,
tells me that he raved of dreadful things whilst he was off his head. i
wanted her to tell me what they were; but she would only cross herself,
and say she would never tell; that the ravings of the sick were the
secrets of god, and that if a nurse through her vocation should hear
them, she should respect her trust. she is a sweet, good soul, and the
next day, when she saw i was troubled, she opened up the subject again,
and after saying that she could never mention what my poor dear raved
about, added: ‘i can tell you this much, my dear: that it was not about
anything which he has done wrong himself; and you, as his wife to be,
have no cause to be concerned. he has not forgotten you or what he owes
to you. his fear was of great and terrible things, which no mortal can
treat of.’ i do believe the dear soul thought i might be jealous lest my
poor dear should have fallen in love with any other girl. the idea of
_my_ being jealous about jonathan! and yet, my dear, let me whisper, i
felt a thrill of joy through me when i _knew_ that no other woman was a
cause of trouble. i am now sitting by his bedside, where i can see his
face while he sleeps. he is waking!...

“when he woke he asked me for his coat, as he wanted to get something
from the pocket; i asked sister agatha, and she brought all his things.
i saw that amongst them was his note-book, and was going to ask him to
let me look at it--for i knew then that i might find some clue to his
trouble--but i suppose he must have seen my wish in my eyes, for he sent
me over to the window, saying he wanted to be quite alone for a moment.
then he called me back, and when i came he had his hand over the
note-book, and he said to me very solemnly:--

“‘wilhelmina’--i knew then that he was in deadly earnest, for he has
never called me by that name since he asked me to marry him--‘you know,
dear, my ideas of the trust between husband and wife: there should be no
secret, no concealment. i have had a great shock, and when i try to
think of what it is i feel my head spin round, and i do not know if it
was all real or the dreaming of a madman. you know i have had brain
fever, and that is to be mad. the secret is here, and i do not want to
know it. i want to take up my life here, with our marriage.’ for, my
dear, we had decided to be married as soon as the formalities are
complete. ‘are you willing, wilhelmina, to share my ignorance? here is
the book. take it and keep it, read it if you will, but never let me
know; unless, indeed, some solemn duty should come upon me to go back to
the bitter hours, asleep or awake, sane or mad, recorded here.’ he fell
back exhausted, and i put the book under his pillow, and kissed him. i
have asked sister agatha to beg the superior to let our wedding be this
afternoon, and am waiting her reply....

       *       *       *       *       *

“she has come and told me that the chaplain of the english mission
church has been sent for. we are to be married in an hour, or as soon
after as jonathan awakes....

       *       *       *       *       *

“lucy, the time has come and gone. i feel very solemn, but very, very
happy. jonathan woke a little after the hour, and all was ready, and he
sat up in bed, propped up with pillows. he answered his ‘i will’ firmly
and strongly. i could hardly speak; my heart was so full that even those
words seemed to choke me. the dear sisters were so kind. please god, i
shall never, never forget them, nor the grave and sweet responsibilities
i have taken upon me. i must tell you of my wedding present. when the
chaplain and the sisters had left me alone with my husband--oh, lucy, it
is the first time i have written the words ‘my husband’--left me alone
with my husband, i took the book from under his pillow, and wrapped it
up in white paper, and tied it with a little bit of pale blue ribbon
which was round my neck, and sealed it over the knot with sealing-wax,
and for my seal i used my wedding ring. then i kissed it and showed it
to my husband, and told him that i would keep it so, and then it would
be an outward and visible sign for us all our lives that we trusted each
other; that i would never open it unless it were for his own dear sake
or for the sake of some stern duty. then he took my hand in his, and oh,
lucy, it was the first time he took _his wife’s_ hand, and said that it
was the dearest thing in all the wide world, and that he would go
through all the past again to win it, if need be. the poor dear meant to
have said a part of the past, but he cannot think of time yet, and i
shall not wonder if at first he mixes up not only the month, but the
year.

“well, my dear, what could i say? i could only tell him that i was the
happiest woman in all the wide world, and that i had nothing to give him
except myself, my life, and my trust, and that with these went my love
and duty for all the days of my life. and, my dear, when he kissed me,
and drew me to him with his poor weak hands, it was like a very solemn
pledge between us....

“lucy dear, do you know why i tell you all this? it is not only because
it is all sweet to me, but because you have been, and are, very dear to
me. it was my privilege to be your friend and guide when you came from
the schoolroom to prepare for the world of life. i want you to see now,
and with the eyes of a very happy wife, whither duty has led me; so that
in your own married life you too may be all happy as i am. my dear,
please almighty god, your life may be all it promises: a long day of
sunshine, with no harsh wind, no forgetting duty, no distrust. i must
not wish you no pain, for that can never be; but i do hope you will be
_always_ as happy as i am _now_. good-bye, my dear. i shall post this at
once, and, perhaps, write you very soon again. i must stop, for jonathan
is waking--i must attend to my husband!

“your ever-loving

“mina harker.”


_letter, lucy westenra to mina harker._

“_whitby, 30 august._

“my dearest mina,--

“oceans of love and millions of kisses, and may you soon be in your own
home with your husband. i wish you could be coming home soon enough to
stay with us here. the strong air would soon restore jonathan; it has
quite restored me. i have an appetite like a cormorant, am full of
life, and sleep well. you will be glad to know that i have quite given
up walking in my sleep. i think i have not stirred out of my bed for a
week, that is when i once got into it at night. arthur says i am getting
fat. by the way, i forgot to tell you that arthur is here. we have such
walks and drives, and rides, and rowing, and tennis, and fishing
together; and i love him more than ever. he _tells_ me that he loves me
more, but i doubt that, for at first he told me that he couldn’t love me
more than he did then. but this is nonsense. there he is, calling to me.
so no more just at present from your loving

“lucy.

“p. s.--mother sends her love. she seems better, poor dear.
“p. p. s.--we are to be married on 28 september.”


_dr. seward’s diary._

_20 august._--the case of renfield grows even more interesting. he has
now so far quieted that there are spells of cessation from his passion.
for the first week after his attack he was perpetually violent. then one
night, just as the moon rose, he grew quiet, and kept murmuring to
himself: “now i can wait; now i can wait.” the attendant came to tell
me, so i ran down at once to have a look at him. he was still in the
strait-waistcoat and in the padded room, but the suffused look had gone
from his face, and his eyes had something of their old pleading--i might
almost say, “cringing”--softness. i was satisfied with his present
condition, and directed him to be relieved. the attendants hesitated,
but finally carried out my wishes without protest. it was a strange
thing that the patient had humour enough to see their distrust, for,
coming close to me, he said in a whisper, all the while looking
furtively at them:--

“they think i could hurt you! fancy _me_ hurting _you_! the fools!”

it was soothing, somehow, to the feelings to find myself dissociated
even in the mind of this poor madman from the others; but all the same i
do not follow his thought. am i to take it that i have anything in
common with him, so that we are, as it were, to stand together; or has
he to gain from me some good so stupendous that my well-being is needful
to him? i must find out later on. to-night he will not speak. even the
offer of a kitten or even a full-grown cat will not tempt him. he will
only say: “i don’t take any stock in cats. i have more to think of now,
and i can wait; i can wait.”

after a while i left him. the attendant tells me that he was quiet
until just before dawn, and that then he began to get uneasy, and at
length violent, until at last he fell into a paroxysm which exhausted
him so that he swooned into a sort of coma.

       *       *       *       *       *

... three nights has the same thing happened--violent all day then quiet
from moonrise to sunrise. i wish i could get some clue to the cause. it
would almost seem as if there was some influence which came and went.
happy thought! we shall to-night play sane wits against mad ones. he
escaped before without our help; to-night he shall escape with it. we
shall give him a chance, and have the men ready to follow in case they
are required....

       *       *       *       *       *

_23 august._--“the unexpected always happens.” how well disraeli knew
life. our bird when he found the cage open would not fly, so all our
subtle arrangements were for nought. at any rate, we have proved one
thing; that the spells of quietness last a reasonable time. we shall in
future be able to ease his bonds for a few hours each day. i have given
orders to the night attendant merely to shut him in the padded room,
when once he is quiet, until an hour before sunrise. the poor soul’s
body will enjoy the relief even if his mind cannot appreciate it. hark!
the unexpected again! i am called; the patient has once more escaped.

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--another night adventure. renfield artfully waited until the
attendant was entering the room to inspect. then he dashed out past him
and flew down the passage. i sent word for the attendants to follow.
again he went into the grounds of the deserted house, and we found him
in the same place, pressed against the old chapel door. when he saw me
he became furious, and had not the attendants seized him in time, he
would have tried to kill me. as we were holding him a strange thing
happened. he suddenly redoubled his efforts, and then as suddenly grew
calm. i looked round instinctively, but could see nothing. then i caught
the patient’s eye and followed it, but could trace nothing as it looked
into the moonlit sky except a big bat, which was flapping its silent and
ghostly way to the west. bats usually wheel and flit about, but this one
seemed to go straight on, as if it knew where it was bound for or had
some intention of its own. the patient grew calmer every instant, and
presently said:--

“you needn’t tie me; i shall go quietly!” without trouble we came back
to the house. i feel there is something ominous in his calm, and shall
not forget this night....


_lucy westenra’s diary_

_hillingham, 24 august._--i must imitate mina, and keep writing things
down. then we can have long talks when we do meet. i wonder when it will
be. i wish she were with me again, for i feel so unhappy. last night i
seemed to be dreaming again just as i was at whitby. perhaps it is the
change of air, or getting home again. it is all dark and horrid to me,
for i can remember nothing; but i am full of vague fear, and i feel so
weak and worn out. when arthur came to lunch he looked quite grieved
when he saw me, and i hadn’t the spirit to try to be cheerful. i wonder
if i could sleep in mother’s room to-night. i shall make an excuse and
try.

       *       *       *       *       *

_25 august._--another bad night. mother did not seem to take to my
proposal. she seems not too well herself, and doubtless she fears to
worry me. i tried to keep awake, and succeeded for a while; but when the
clock struck twelve it waked me from a doze, so i must have been falling
asleep. there was a sort of scratching or flapping at the window, but i
did not mind it, and as i remember no more, i suppose i must then have
fallen asleep. more bad dreams. i wish i could remember them. this
morning i am horribly weak. my face is ghastly pale, and my throat pains
me. it must be something wrong with my lungs, for i don’t seem ever to
get air enough. i shall try to cheer up when arthur comes, or else i
know he will be miserable to see me so.


_letter, arthur holmwood to dr. seward._

“_albemarle hotel, 31 august._

“my dear jack,--

“i want you to do me a favour. lucy is ill; that is, she has no special
disease, but she looks awful, and is getting worse every day. i have
asked her if there is any cause; i do not dare to ask her mother, for to
disturb the poor lady’s mind about her daughter in her present state of
health would be fatal. mrs. westenra has confided to me that her doom is
spoken--disease of the heart--though poor lucy does not know it yet. i
am sure that there is something preying on my dear girl’s mind. i am
almost distracted when i think of her; to look at her gives me a pang. i
told her i should ask you to see her, and though she demurred at
first--i know why, old fellow--she finally consented. it will be a
painful task for you, i know, old friend, but it is for _her_ sake, and
i must not hesitate to ask, or you to act. you are to come to lunch at
hillingham to-morrow, two o’clock, so as not to arouse any suspicion in
mrs. westenra, and after lunch lucy will take an opportunity of being
alone with you. i shall come in for tea, and we can go away together; i
am filled with anxiety, and want to consult with you alone as soon as i
can after you have seen her. do not fail!

“arthur.”


_telegram, arthur holmwood to seward._

“_1 september._

“am summoned to see my father, who is worse. am writing. write me fully
by to-night’s post to ring. wire me if necessary.”


_letter from dr. seward to arthur holmwood._

“_2 september._

“my dear old fellow,--

“with regard to miss westenra’s health i hasten to let you know at once
that in my opinion there is not any functional disturbance or any malady
that i know of. at the same time, i am not by any means satisfied with
her appearance; she is woefully different from what she was when i saw
her last. of course you must bear in mind that i did not have full
opportunity of examination such as i should wish; our very friendship
makes a little difficulty which not even medical science or custom can
bridge over. i had better tell you exactly what happened, leaving you to
draw, in a measure, your own conclusions. i shall then say what i have
done and propose doing.

“i found miss westenra in seemingly gay spirits. her mother was present,
and in a few seconds i made up my mind that she was trying all she knew
to mislead her mother and prevent her from being anxious. i have no
doubt she guesses, if she does not know, what need of caution there is.
we lunched alone, and as we all exerted ourselves to be cheerful, we
got, as some kind of reward for our labours, some real cheerfulness
amongst us. then mrs. westenra went to lie down, and lucy was left with
me. we went into her boudoir, and till we got there her gaiety remained,
for the servants were coming and going. as soon as the door was closed,
however, the mask fell from her face, and she sank down into a chair
with a great sigh, and hid her eyes with her hand. when i saw that her
high spirits had failed, i at once took advantage of her reaction to
make a diagnosis. she said to me very sweetly:--

“‘i cannot tell you how i loathe talking about myself.’ i reminded her
that a doctor’s confidence was sacred, but that you were grievously
anxious about her. she caught on to my meaning at once, and settled that
matter in a word. ‘tell arthur everything you choose. i do not care for
myself, but all for him!’ so i am quite free.

“i could easily see that she is somewhat bloodless, but i could not see
the usual anæmic signs, and by a chance i was actually able to test the
quality of her blood, for in opening a window which was stiff a cord
gave way, and she cut her hand slightly with broken glass. it was a
slight matter in itself, but it gave me an evident chance, and i secured
a few drops of the blood and have analysed them. the qualitative
analysis gives a quite normal condition, and shows, i should infer, in
itself a vigorous state of health. in other physical matters i was quite
satisfied that there is no need for anxiety; but as there must be a
cause somewhere, i have come to the conclusion that it must be something
mental. she complains of difficulty in breathing satisfactorily at
times, and of heavy, lethargic sleep, with dreams that frighten her, but
regarding which she can remember nothing. she says that as a child she
used to walk in her sleep, and that when in whitby the habit came back,
and that once she walked out in the night and went to east cliff, where
miss murray found her; but she assures me that of late the habit has not
returned. i am in doubt, and so have done the best thing i know of; i
have written to my old friend and master, professor van helsing, of
amsterdam, who knows as much about obscure diseases as any one in the
world. i have asked him to come over, and as you told me that all things
were to be at your charge, i have mentioned to him who you are and your
relations to miss westenra. this, my dear fellow, is in obedience to
your wishes, for i am only too proud and happy to do anything i can for
her. van helsing would, i know, do anything for me for a personal
reason, so, no matter on what ground he comes, we must accept his
wishes. he is a seemingly arbitrary man, but this is because he knows
what he is talking about better than any one else. he is a philosopher
and a metaphysician, and one of the most advanced scientists of his day;
and he has, i believe, an absolutely open mind. this, with an iron
nerve, a temper of the ice-brook, an indomitable resolution,
self-command, and toleration exalted from virtues to blessings, and the
kindliest and truest heart that beats--these form his equipment for the
noble work that he is doing for mankind--work both in theory and
practice, for his views are as wide as his all-embracing sympathy. i
tell you these facts that you may know why i have such confidence in
him. i have asked him to come at once. i shall see miss westenra
to-morrow again. she is to meet me at the stores, so that i may not
alarm her mother by too early a repetition of my call.

“yours always,

“john seward.”


_letter, abraham van helsing, m. d., d. ph., d. lit., etc., etc., to dr.
seward._

“_2 september._

“my good friend,--

“when i have received your letter i am already coming to you. by good
fortune i can leave just at once, without wrong to any of those who have
trusted me. were fortune other, then it were bad for those who have
trusted, for i come to my friend when he call me to aid those he holds
dear. tell your friend that when that time you suck from my wound so
swiftly the poison of the gangrene from that knife that our other
friend, too nervous, let slip, you did more for him when he wants my
aids and you call for them than all his great fortune could do. but it
is pleasure added to do for him, your friend; it is to you that i come.
have then rooms for me at the great eastern hotel, so that i may be near
to hand, and please it so arrange that we may see the young lady not too
late on to-morrow, for it is likely that i may have to return here that
night. but if need be i shall come again in three days, and stay longer
if it must. till then good-bye, my friend john.

 “van helsing.”


_letter, dr. seward to hon. arthur holmwood._

“_3 september._

“my dear art,--

“van helsing has come and gone. he came on with me to hillingham, and
found that, by lucy’s discretion, her mother was lunching out, so that
we were alone with her. van helsing made a very careful examination of
the patient. he is to report to me, and i shall advise you, for of
course i was not present all the time. he is, i fear, much concerned,
but says he must think. when i told him of our friendship and how you
trust to me in the matter, he said: ‘you must tell him all you think.
tell him what i think, if you can guess it, if you will. nay, i am not
jesting. this is no jest, but life and death, perhaps more.’ i asked
what he meant by that, for he was very serious. this was when we had
come back to town, and he was having a cup of tea before starting on his
return to amsterdam. he would not give me any further clue. you must not
be angry with me, art, because his very reticence means that all his
brains are working for her good. he will speak plainly enough when the
time comes, be sure. so i told him i would simply write an account of
our visit, just as if i were doing a descriptive special article for
_the daily telegraph_. he seemed not to notice, but remarked that the
smuts in london were not quite so bad as they used to be when he was a
student here. i am to get his report to-morrow if he can possibly make
it. in any case i am to have a letter.

“well, as to the visit. lucy was more cheerful than on the day i first
saw her, and certainly looked better. she had lost something of the
ghastly look that so upset you, and her breathing was normal. she was
very sweet to the professor (as she always is), and tried to make him
feel at ease; though i could see that the poor girl was making a hard
struggle for it. i believe van helsing saw it, too, for i saw the quick
look under his bushy brows that i knew of old. then he began to chat of
all things except ourselves and diseases and with such an infinite
geniality that i could see poor lucy’s pretense of animation merge into
reality. then, without any seeming change, he brought the conversation
gently round to his visit, and suavely said:--

“‘my dear young miss, i have the so great pleasure because you are so
much beloved. that is much, my dear, ever were there that which i do not
see. they told me you were down in the spirit, and that you were of a
ghastly pale. to them i say: “pouf!”’ and he snapped his fingers at me
and went on: ‘but you and i shall show them how wrong they are. how can
he’--and he pointed at me with the same look and gesture as that with
which once he pointed me out to his class, on, or rather after, a
particular occasion which he never fails to remind me of--‘know anything
of a young ladies? he has his madmans to play with, and to bring them
back to happiness, and to those that love them. it is much to do, and,
oh, but there are rewards, in that we can bestow such happiness. but the
young ladies! he has no wife nor daughter, and the young do not tell
themselves to the young, but to the old, like me, who have known so many
sorrows and the causes of them. so, my dear, we will send him away to
smoke the cigarette in the garden, whiles you and i have little talk all
to ourselves.’ i took the hint, and strolled about, and presently the
professor came to the window and called me in. he looked grave, but
said: ‘i have made careful examination, but there is no functional
cause. with you i agree that there has been much blood lost; it has
been, but is not. but the conditions of her are in no way anæmic. i have
asked her to send me her maid, that i may ask just one or two question,
that so i may not chance to miss nothing. i know well what she will say.
and yet there is cause; there is always cause for everything. i must go
back home and think. you must send to me the telegram every day; and if
there be cause i shall come again. the disease--for not to be all well
is a disease--interest me, and the sweet young dear, she interest me
too. she charm me, and for her, if not for you or disease, i come.’

“as i tell you, he would not say a word more, even when we were alone.
and so now, art, you know all i know. i shall keep stern watch. i trust
your poor father is rallying. it must be a terrible thing to you, my
dear old fellow, to be placed in such a position between two people who
are both so dear to you. i know your idea of duty to your father, and
you are right to stick to it; but, if need be, i shall send you word to
come at once to lucy; so do not be over-anxious unless you hear from
me.”


_dr. seward’s diary._

_4 september._--zoöphagous patient still keeps up our interest in him.
he had only one outburst and that was yesterday at an unusual time. just
before the stroke of noon he began to grow restless. the attendant knew
the symptoms, and at once summoned aid. fortunately the men came at a
run, and were just in time, for at the stroke of noon he became so
violent that it took all their strength to hold him. in about five
minutes, however, he began to get more and more quiet, and finally sank
into a sort of melancholy, in which state he has remained up to now. the
attendant tells me that his screams whilst in the paroxysm were really
appalling; i found my hands full when i got in, attending to some of the
other patients who were frightened by him. indeed, i can quite
understand the effect, for the sounds disturbed even me, though i was
some distance away. it is now after the dinner-hour of the asylum, and
as yet my patient sits in a corner brooding, with a dull, sullen,
woe-begone look in his face, which seems rather to indicate than to show
something directly. i cannot quite understand it.

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--another change in my patient. at five o’clock i looked in on
him, and found him seemingly as happy and contented as he used to be. he
was catching flies and eating them, and was keeping note of his capture
by making nail-marks on the edge of the door between the ridges of
padding. when he saw me, he came over and apologised for his bad
conduct, and asked me in a very humble, cringing way to be led back to
his own room and to have his note-book again. i thought it well to
humour him: so he is back in his room with the window open. he has the
sugar of his tea spread out on the window-sill, and is reaping quite a
harvest of flies. he is not now eating them, but putting them into a
box, as of old, and is already examining the corners of his room to find
a spider. i tried to get him to talk about the past few days, for any
clue to his thoughts would be of immense help to me; but he would not
rise. for a moment or two he looked very sad, and said in a sort of
far-away voice, as though saying it rather to himself than to me:--

“all over! all over! he has deserted me. no hope for me now unless i do
it for myself!” then suddenly turning to me in a resolute way, he said:
“doctor, won’t you be very good to me and let me have a little more
sugar? i think it would be good for me.”

“and the flies?” i said.

“yes! the flies like it, too, and i like the flies; therefore i like
it.” and there are people who know so little as to think that madmen do
not argue. i procured him a double supply, and left him as happy a man
as, i suppose, any in the world. i wish i could fathom his mind.

       *       *       *       *       *

_midnight._--another change in him. i had been to see miss westenra,
whom i found much better, and had just returned, and was standing at our
own gate looking at the sunset, when once more i heard him yelling. as
his room is on this side of the house, i could hear it better than in
the morning. it was a shock to me to turn from the wonderful smoky
beauty of a sunset over london, with its lurid lights and inky shadows
and all the marvellous tints that come on foul clouds even as on foul
water, and to realise all the grim sternness of my own cold stone
building, with its wealth of breathing misery, and my own desolate heart
to endure it all. i reached him just as the sun was going down, and from
his window saw the red disc sink. as it sank he became less and less
frenzied; and just as it dipped he slid from the hands that held him, an
inert mass, on the floor. it is wonderful, however, what intellectual
recuperative power lunatics have, for within a few minutes he stood up
quite calmly and looked around him. i signalled to the attendants not to
hold him, for i was anxious to see what he would do. he went straight
over to the window and brushed out the crumbs of sugar; then he took his
fly-box, and emptied it outside, and threw away the box; then he shut
the window, and crossing over, sat down on his bed. all this surprised
me, so i asked him: “are you not going to keep flies any more?”

“no,” said he; “i am sick of all that rubbish!” he certainly is a
wonderfully interesting study. i wish i could get some glimpse of his
mind or of the cause of his sudden passion. stop; there may be a clue
after all, if we can find why to-day his paroxysms came on at high noon
and at sunset. can it be that there is a malign influence of the sun at
periods which affects certain natures--as at times the moon does others?
we shall see.


_telegram, seward, london, to van helsing, amsterdam._

“_4 september._--patient still better to-day.”


_telegram, seward, london, to van helsing, amsterdam._

“_5 september._--patient greatly improved. good appetite; sleeps
naturally; good spirits; colour coming back.”


_telegram, seward, london, to van helsing, amsterdam._

“_6 september._--terrible change for the worse. come at once; do not
lose an hour. i hold over telegram to holmwood till have seen you.”




chapter x


_letter, dr. seward to hon. arthur holmwood._

“_6 september._

“my dear art,--

“my news to-day is not so good. lucy this morning had gone back a bit.
there is, however, one good thing which has arisen from it; mrs.
westenra was naturally anxious concerning lucy, and has consulted me
professionally about her. i took advantage of the opportunity, and told
her that my old master, van helsing, the great specialist, was coming to
stay with me, and that i would put her in his charge conjointly with
myself; so now we can come and go without alarming her unduly, for a
shock to her would mean sudden death, and this, in lucy’s weak
condition, might be disastrous to her. we are hedged in with
difficulties, all of us, my poor old fellow; but, please god, we shall
come through them all right. if any need i shall write, so that, if you
do not hear from me, take it for granted that i am simply waiting for
news. in haste

“yours ever,

“john seward.”


_dr. seward’s diary._

_7 september._--the first thing van helsing said to me when we met at
liverpool street was:--

“have you said anything to our young friend the lover of her?”

“no,” i said. “i waited till i had seen you, as i said in my telegram. i
wrote him a letter simply telling him that you were coming, as miss
westenra was not so well, and that i should let him know if need be.”

“right, my friend,” he said, “quite right! better he not know as yet;
perhaps he shall never know. i pray so; but if it be needed, then he
shall know all. and, my good friend john, let me caution you. you deal
with the madmen. all men are mad in some way or the other; and inasmuch
as you deal discreetly with your madmen, so deal with god’s madmen,
too--the rest of the world. you tell not your madmen what you do nor why
you do it; you tell them not what you think. so you shall keep knowledge
in its place, where it may rest--where it may gather its kind around it
and breed. you and i shall keep as yet what we know here, and here.” he
touched me on the heart and on the forehead, and then touched himself
the same way. “i have for myself thoughts at the present. later i shall
unfold to you.”

“why not now?” i asked. “it may do some good; we may arrive at some
decision.” he stopped and looked at me, and said:--

“my friend john, when the corn is grown, even before it has
ripened--while the milk of its mother-earth is in him, and the sunshine
has not yet begun to paint him with his gold, the husbandman he pull the
ear and rub him between his rough hands, and blow away the green chaff,
and say to you: ‘look! he’s good corn; he will make good crop when the
time comes.’” i did not see the application, and told him so. for reply
he reached over and took my ear in his hand and pulled it playfully, as
he used long ago to do at lectures, and said: “the good husbandman tell
you so then because he knows, but not till then. but you do not find the
good husbandman dig up his planted corn to see if he grow; that is for
the children who play at husbandry, and not for those who take it as of
the work of their life. see you now, friend john? i have sown my corn,
and nature has her work to do in making it sprout; if he sprout at all,
there’s some promise; and i wait till the ear begins to swell.” he broke
off, for he evidently saw that i understood. then he went on, and very
gravely:--

“you were always a careful student, and your case-book was ever more
full than the rest. you were only student then; now you are master, and
i trust that good habit have not fail. remember, my friend, that
knowledge is stronger than memory, and we should not trust the weaker.
even if you have not kept the good practise, let me tell you that this
case of our dear miss is one that may be--mind, i say _may be_--of such
interest to us and others that all the rest may not make him kick the
beam, as your peoples say. take then good note of it. nothing is too
small. i counsel you, put down in record even your doubts and surmises.
hereafter it may be of interest to you to see how true you guess. we
learn from failure, not from success!”

when i described lucy’s symptoms--the same as before, but infinitely
more marked--he looked very grave, but said nothing. he took with him a
bag in which were many instruments and drugs, “the ghastly paraphernalia
of our beneficial trade,” as he once called, in one of his lectures, the
equipment of a professor of the healing craft. when we were shown in,
mrs. westenra met us. she was alarmed, but not nearly so much as i
expected to find her. nature in one of her beneficent moods has ordained
that even death has some antidote to its own terrors. here, in a case
where any shock may prove fatal, matters are so ordered that, from some
cause or other, the things not personal--even the terrible change in her
daughter to whom she is so attached--do not seem to reach her. it is
something like the way dame nature gathers round a foreign body an
envelope of some insensitive tissue which can protect from evil that
which it would otherwise harm by contact. if this be an ordered
selfishness, then we should pause before we condemn any one for the vice
of egoism, for there may be deeper root for its causes than we have
knowledge of.

i used my knowledge of this phase of spiritual pathology, and laid down
a rule that she should not be present with lucy or think of her illness
more than was absolutely required. she assented readily, so readily that
i saw again the hand of nature fighting for life. van helsing and i were
shown up to lucy’s room. if i was shocked when i saw her yesterday, i
was horrified when i saw her to-day. she was ghastly, chalkily pale; the
red seemed to have gone even from her lips and gums, and the bones of
her face stood out prominently; her breathing was painful to see or
hear. van helsing’s face grew set as marble, and his eyebrows converged
till they almost touched over his nose. lucy lay motionless, and did not
seem to have strength to speak, so for a while we were all silent. then
van helsing beckoned to me, and we went gently out of the room. the
instant we had closed the door he stepped quickly along the passage to
the next door, which was open. then he pulled me quickly in with him and
closed the door. “my god!” he said; “this is dreadful. there is no time
to be lost. she will die for sheer want of blood to keep the heart’s
action as it should be. there must be transfusion of blood at once. is
it you or me?”

“i am younger and stronger, professor. it must be me.”

“then get ready at once. i will bring up my bag. i am prepared.”

i went downstairs with him, and as we were going there was a knock at
the hall-door. when we reached the hall the maid had just opened the
door, and arthur was stepping quickly in. he rushed up to me, saying in
an eager whisper:--

“jack, i was so anxious. i read between the lines of your letter, and
have been in an agony. the dad was better, so i ran down here to see for
myself. is not that gentleman dr. van helsing? i am so thankful to you,
sir, for coming.” when first the professor’s eye had lit upon him he had
been angry at his interruption at such a time; but now, as he took in
his stalwart proportions and recognised the strong young manhood which
seemed to emanate from him, his eyes gleamed. without a pause he said to
him gravely as he held out his hand:--

“sir, you have come in time. you are the lover of our dear miss. she is
bad, very, very bad. nay, my child, do not go like that.” for he
suddenly grew pale and sat down in a chair almost fainting. “you are to
help her. you can do more than any that live, and your courage is your
best help.”

“what can i do?” asked arthur hoarsely. “tell me, and i shall do it. my
life is hers, and i would give the last drop of blood in my body for
her.” the professor has a strongly humorous side, and i could from old
knowledge detect a trace of its origin in his answer:--

“my young sir, i do not ask so much as that--not the last!”

“what shall i do?” there was fire in his eyes, and his open nostril
quivered with intent. van helsing slapped him on the shoulder. “come!”
he said. “you are a man, and it is a man we want. you are better than
me, better than my friend john.” arthur looked bewildered, and the
professor went on by explaining in a kindly way:--

“young miss is bad, very bad. she wants blood, and blood she must have
or die. my friend john and i have consulted; and we are about to perform
what we call transfusion of blood--to transfer from full veins of one to
the empty veins which pine for him. john was to give his blood, as he is
the more young and strong than me”--here arthur took my hand and wrung
it hard in silence--“but, now you are here, you are more good than us,
old or young, who toil much in the world of thought. our nerves are not
so calm and our blood not so bright than yours!” arthur turned to him
and said:--

“if you only knew how gladly i would die for her you would
understand----”

he stopped, with a sort of choke in his voice.

“good boy!” said van helsing. “in the not-so-far-off you will be happy
that you have done all for her you love. come now and be silent. you
shall kiss her once before it is done, but then you must go; and you
must leave at my sign. say no word to madame; you know how it is with
her! there must be no shock; any knowledge of this would be one. come!”

we all went up to lucy’s room. arthur by direction remained outside.
lucy turned her head and looked at us, but said nothing. she was not
asleep, but she was simply too weak to make the effort. her eyes spoke
to us; that was all. van helsing took some things from his bag and laid
them on a little table out of sight. then he mixed a narcotic, and
coming over to the bed, said cheerily:--

“now, little miss, here is your medicine. drink it off, like a good
child. see, i lift you so that to swallow is easy. yes.” she had made
the effort with success.

it astonished me how long the drug took to act. this, in fact, marked
the extent of her weakness. the time seemed endless until sleep began to
flicker in her eyelids. at last, however, the narcotic began to manifest
its potency; and she fell into a deep sleep. when the professor was
satisfied he called arthur into the room, and bade him strip off his
coat. then he added: “you may take that one little kiss whiles i bring
over the table. friend john, help to me!” so neither of us looked whilst
he bent over her.

van helsing turning to me, said:

“he is so young and strong and of blood so pure that we need not
defibrinate it.”

then with swiftness, but with absolute method, van helsing performed the
operation. as the transfusion went on something like life seemed to come
back to poor lucy’s cheeks, and through arthur’s growing pallor the joy
of his face seemed absolutely to shine. after a bit i began to grow
anxious, for the loss of blood was telling on arthur, strong man as he
was. it gave me an idea of what a terrible strain lucy’s system must
have undergone that what weakened arthur only partially restored her.
but the professor’s face was set, and he stood watch in hand and with
his eyes fixed now on the patient and now on arthur. i could hear my own
heart beat. presently he said in a soft voice: “do not stir an instant.
it is enough. you attend him; i will look to her.” when all was over i
could see how much arthur was weakened. i dressed the wound and took his
arm to bring him away, when van helsing spoke without turning round--the
man seems to have eyes in the back of his head:--

“the brave lover, i think, deserve another kiss, which he shall have
presently.” and as he had now finished his operation, he adjusted the
pillow to the patient’s head. as he did so the narrow black velvet band
which she seems always to wear round her throat, buckled with an old
diamond buckle which her lover had given her, was dragged a little up,
and showed a red mark on her throat. arthur did not notice it, but i
could hear the deep hiss of indrawn breath which is one of van helsing’s
ways of betraying emotion. he said nothing at the moment, but turned to
me, saying: “now take down our brave young lover, give him of the port
wine, and let him lie down a while. he must then go home and rest, sleep
much and eat much, that he may be recruited of what he has so given to
his love. he must not stay here. hold! a moment. i may take it, sir,
that you are anxious of result. then bring it with you that in all ways
the operation is successful. you have saved her life this time, and you
can go home and rest easy in mind that all that can be is. i shall tell
her all when she is well; she shall love you none the less for what you
have done. good-bye.”

when arthur had gone i went back to the room. lucy was sleeping gently,
but her breathing was stronger; i could see the counterpane move as her
breast heaved. by the bedside sat van helsing, looking at her intently.
the velvet band again covered the red mark. i asked the professor in a
whisper:--

“what do you make of that mark on her throat?”

“what do you make of it?”

“i have not examined it yet,” i answered, and then and there proceeded
to loose the band. just over the external jugular vein there were two
punctures, not large, but not wholesome-looking. there was no sign of
disease, but the edges were white and worn-looking, as if by some
trituration. it at once occurred to me that this wound, or whatever it
was, might be the means of that manifest loss of blood; but i abandoned
the idea as soon as formed, for such a thing could not be. the whole bed
would have been drenched to a scarlet with the blood which the girl must
have lost to leave such a pallor as she had before the transfusion.

“well?” said van helsing.

“well,” said i, “i can make nothing of it.” the professor stood up. “i
must go back to amsterdam to-night,” he said. “there are books and
things there which i want. you must remain here all the night, and you
must not let your sight pass from her.”

“shall i have a nurse?” i asked.

“we are the best nurses, you and i. you keep watch all night; see that
she is well fed, and that nothing disturbs her. you must not sleep all
the night. later on we can sleep, you and i. i shall be back as soon as
possible. and then we may begin.”

“may begin?” i said. “what on earth do you mean?”

“we shall see!” he answered, as he hurried out. he came back a moment
later and put his head inside the door and said with warning finger held
up:--

“remember, she is your charge. if you leave her, and harm befall, you
shall not sleep easy hereafter!”


_dr. seward’s diary--continued._

_8 september._--i sat up all night with lucy. the opiate worked itself
off towards dusk, and she waked naturally; she looked a different being
from what she had been before the operation. her spirits even were good,
and she was full of a happy vivacity, but i could see evidences of the
absolute prostration which she had undergone. when i told mrs. westenra
that dr. van helsing had directed that i should sit up with her she
almost pooh-poohed the idea, pointing out her daughter’s renewed
strength and excellent spirits. i was firm, however, and made
preparations for my long vigil. when her maid had prepared her for the
night i came in, having in the meantime had supper, and took a seat by
the bedside. she did not in any way make objection, but looked at me
gratefully whenever i caught her eye. after a long spell she seemed
sinking off to sleep, but with an effort seemed to pull herself together
and shook it off. this was repeated several times, with greater effort
and with shorter pauses as the time moved on. it was apparent that she
did not want to sleep, so i tackled the subject at once:--

“you do not want to go to sleep?”

“no; i am afraid.”

“afraid to go to sleep! why so? it is the boon we all crave for.”

“ah, not if you were like me--if sleep was to you a presage of horror!”

“a presage of horror! what on earth do you mean?”

“i don’t know; oh, i don’t know. and that is what is so terrible. all
this weakness comes to me in sleep; until i dread the very thought.”

“but, my dear girl, you may sleep to-night. i am here watching you, and
i can promise that nothing will happen.”

“ah, i can trust you!” i seized the opportunity, and said: “i promise
you that if i see any evidence of bad dreams i will wake you at once.”

“you will? oh, will you really? how good you are to me. then i will
sleep!” and almost at the word she gave a deep sigh of relief, and sank
back, asleep.

all night long i watched by her. she never stirred, but slept on and on
in a deep, tranquil, life-giving, health-giving sleep. her lips were
slightly parted, and her breast rose and fell with the regularity of a
pendulum. there was a smile on her face, and it was evident that no bad
dreams had come to disturb her peace of mind.

in the early morning her maid came, and i left her in her care and took
myself back home, for i was anxious about many things. i sent a short
wire to van helsing and to arthur, telling them of the excellent result
of the operation. my own work, with its manifold arrears, took me all
day to clear off; it was dark when i was able to inquire about my
zoöphagous patient. the report was good; he had been quite quiet for the
past day and night. a telegram came from van helsing at amsterdam whilst
i was at dinner, suggesting that i should be at hillingham to-night, as
it might be well to be at hand, and stating that he was leaving by the
night mail and would join me early in the morning.

       *       *       *       *       *

_9 september_.--i was pretty tired and worn out when i got to
hillingham. for two nights i had hardly had a wink of sleep, and my
brain was beginning to feel that numbness which marks cerebral
exhaustion. lucy was up and in cheerful spirits. when she shook hands
with me she looked sharply in my face and said:--

“no sitting up to-night for you. you are worn out. i am quite well
again; indeed, i am; and if there is to be any sitting up, it is i who
will sit up with you.” i would not argue the point, but went and had my
supper. lucy came with me, and, enlivened by her charming presence, i
made an excellent meal, and had a couple of glasses of the more than
excellent port. then lucy took me upstairs, and showed me a room next
her own, where a cozy fire was burning. “now,” she said, “you must stay
here. i shall leave this door open and my door too. you can lie on the
sofa for i know that nothing would induce any of you doctors to go to
bed whilst there is a patient above the horizon. if i want anything i
shall call out, and you can come to me at once.” i could not but
acquiesce, for i was “dog-tired,” and could not have sat up had i tried.
so, on her renewing her promise to call me if she should want anything,
i lay on the sofa, and forgot all about everything.


_lucy westenra’s diary._

_9 september._--i feel so happy to-night. i have been so miserably weak,
that to be able to think and move about is like feeling sunshine after
a long spell of east wind out of a steel sky. somehow arthur feels very,
very close to me. i seem to feel his presence warm about me. i suppose
it is that sickness and weakness are selfish things and turn our inner
eyes and sympathy on ourselves, whilst health and strength give love
rein, and in thought and feeling he can wander where he wills. i know
where my thoughts are. if arthur only knew! my dear, my dear, your ears
must tingle as you sleep, as mine do waking. oh, the blissful rest of
last night! how i slept, with that dear, good dr. seward watching me.
and to-night i shall not fear to sleep, since he is close at hand and
within call. thank everybody for being so good to me! thank god!
good-night, arthur.


_dr. seward’s diary._

_10 september._--i was conscious of the professor’s hand on my head, and
started awake all in a second. that is one of the things that we learn
in an asylum, at any rate.

“and how is our patient?”

“well, when i left her, or rather when she left me,” i answered.

“come, let us see,” he said. and together we went into the room.

the blind was down, and i went over to raise it gently, whilst van
helsing stepped, with his soft, cat-like tread, over to the bed.

as i raised the blind, and the morning sunlight flooded the room, i
heard the professor’s low hiss of inspiration, and knowing its rarity, a
deadly fear shot through my heart. as i passed over he moved back, and
his exclamation of horror, “gott in himmel!” needed no enforcement from
his agonised face. he raised his hand and pointed to the bed, and his
iron face was drawn and ashen white. i felt my knees begin to tremble.

there on the bed, seemingly in a swoon, lay poor lucy, more horribly
white and wan-looking than ever. even the lips were white, and the gums
seemed to have shrunken back from the teeth, as we sometimes see in a
corpse after a prolonged illness. van helsing raised his foot to stamp
in anger, but the instinct of his life and all the long years of habit
stood to him, and he put it down again softly. “quick!” he said. “bring
the brandy.” i flew to the dining-room, and returned with the decanter.
he wetted the poor white lips with it, and together we rubbed palm and
wrist and heart. he felt her heart, and after a few moments of agonising
suspense said:--

“it is not too late. it beats, though but feebly. all our work is
undone; we must begin again. there is no young arthur here now; i have
to call on you yourself this time, friend john.” as he spoke, he was
dipping into his bag and producing the instruments for transfusion; i
had taken off my coat and rolled up my shirt-sleeve. there was no
possibility of an opiate just at present, and no need of one; and so,
without a moment’s delay, we began the operation. after a time--it did
not seem a short time either, for the draining away of one’s blood, no
matter how willingly it be given, is a terrible feeling--van helsing
held up a warning finger. “do not stir,” he said, “but i fear that with
growing strength she may wake; and that would make danger, oh, so much
danger. but i shall precaution take. i shall give hypodermic injection
of morphia.” he proceeded then, swiftly and deftly, to carry out his
intent. the effect on lucy was not bad, for the faint seemed to merge
subtly into the narcotic sleep. it was with a feeling of personal pride
that i could see a faint tinge of colour steal back into the pallid
cheeks and lips. no man knows, till he experiences it, what it is to
feel his own life-blood drawn away into the veins of the woman he loves.

the professor watched me critically. “that will do,” he said. “already?”
i remonstrated. “you took a great deal more from art.” to which he
smiled a sad sort of smile as he replied:--

“he is her lover, her _fiancé_. you have work, much work, to do for her
and for others; and the present will suffice.”

when we stopped the operation, he attended to lucy, whilst i applied
digital pressure to my own incision. i laid down, whilst i waited his
leisure to attend to me, for i felt faint and a little sick. by-and-by
he bound up my wound, and sent me downstairs to get a glass of wine for
myself. as i was leaving the room, he came after me, and half
whispered:--

“mind, nothing must be said of this. if our young lover should turn up
unexpected, as before, no word to him. it would at once frighten him and
enjealous him, too. there must be none. so!”

when i came back he looked at me carefully, and then said:--

“you are not much the worse. go into the room, and lie on your sofa, and
rest awhile; then have much breakfast, and come here to me.”

i followed out his orders, for i knew how right and wise they were. i
had done my part, and now my next duty was to keep up my strength. i
felt very weak, and in the weakness lost something of the amazement at
what had occurred. i fell asleep on the sofa, however, wondering over
and over again how lucy had made such a retrograde movement, and how
she could have been drained of so much blood with no sign anywhere to
show for it. i think i must have continued my wonder in my dreams, for,
sleeping and waking, my thoughts always came back to the little
punctures in her throat and the ragged, exhausted appearance of their
edges--tiny though they were.

lucy slept well into the day, and when she woke she was fairly well and
strong, though not nearly so much so as the day before. when van helsing
had seen her, he went out for a walk, leaving me in charge, with strict
injunctions that i was not to leave her for a moment. i could hear his
voice in the hall, asking the way to the nearest telegraph office.

lucy chatted with me freely, and seemed quite unconscious that anything
had happened. i tried to keep her amused and interested. when her mother
came up to see her, she did not seem to notice any change whatever, but
said to me gratefully:--

“we owe you so much, dr. seward, for all you have done, but you really
must now take care not to overwork yourself. you are looking pale
yourself. you want a wife to nurse and look after you a bit; that you
do!” as she spoke, lucy turned crimson, though it was only momentarily,
for her poor wasted veins could not stand for long such an unwonted
drain to the head. the reaction came in excessive pallor as she turned
imploring eyes on me. i smiled and nodded, and laid my finger on my
lips; with a sigh, she sank back amid her pillows.

van helsing returned in a couple of hours, and presently said to me:
“now you go home, and eat much and drink enough. make yourself strong. i
stay here to-night, and i shall sit up with little miss myself. you and
i must watch the case, and we must have none other to know. i have grave
reasons. no, do not ask them; think what you will. do not fear to think
even the most not-probable. good-night.”

in the hall two of the maids came to me, and asked if they or either of
them might not sit up with miss lucy. they implored me to let them; and
when i said it was dr. van helsing’s wish that either he or i should sit
up, they asked me quite piteously to intercede with the “foreign
gentleman.” i was much touched by their kindness. perhaps it is because
i am weak at present, and perhaps because it was on lucy’s account, that
their devotion was manifested; for over and over again have i seen
similar instances of woman’s kindness. i got back here in time for a
late dinner; went my rounds--all well; and set this down whilst waiting
for sleep. it is coming.

       *       *       *       *       *

_11 september._--this afternoon i went over to hillingham. found van
helsing in excellent spirits, and lucy much better. shortly after i had
arrived, a big parcel from abroad came for the professor. he opened it
with much impressment--assumed, of course--and showed a great bundle of
white flowers.

“these are for you, miss lucy,” he said.

“for me? oh, dr. van helsing!”

“yes, my dear, but not for you to play with. these are medicines.” here
lucy made a wry face. “nay, but they are not to take in a decoction or
in nauseous form, so you need not snub that so charming nose, or i shall
point out to my friend arthur what woes he may have to endure in seeing
so much beauty that he so loves so much distort. aha, my pretty miss,
that bring the so nice nose all straight again. this is medicinal, but
you do not know how. i put him in your window, i make pretty wreath, and
hang him round your neck, so that you sleep well. oh yes! they, like the
lotus flower, make your trouble forgotten. it smell so like the waters
of lethe, and of that fountain of youth that the conquistadores sought
for in the floridas, and find him all too late.”

whilst he was speaking, lucy had been examining the flowers and smelling
them. now she threw them down, saying, with half-laughter, and
half-disgust:--

“oh, professor, i believe you are only putting up a joke on me. why,
these flowers are only common garlic.”

to my surprise, van helsing rose up and said with all his sternness, his
iron jaw set and his bushy eyebrows meeting:--

“no trifling with me! i never jest! there is grim purpose in all i do;
and i warn you that you do not thwart me. take care, for the sake of
others if not for your own.” then seeing poor lucy scared, as she might
well be, he went on more gently: “oh, little miss, my dear, do not fear
me. i only do for your good; but there is much virtue to you in those so
common flowers. see, i place them myself in your room. i make myself the
wreath that you are to wear. but hush! no telling to others that make so
inquisitive questions. we must obey, and silence is a part of obedience;
and obedience is to bring you strong and well into loving arms that wait
for you. now sit still awhile. come with me, friend john, and you shall
help me deck the room with my garlic, which is all the way from haarlem,
where my friend vanderpool raise herb in his glass-houses all the year.
i had to telegraph yesterday, or they would not have been here.”

we went into the room, taking the flowers with us. the professor’s
actions were certainly odd and not to be found in any pharmacopoeia
that i ever heard of. first he fastened up the windows and latched them
securely; next, taking a handful of the flowers, he rubbed them all over
the sashes, as though to ensure that every whiff of air that might get
in would be laden with the garlic smell. then with the wisp he rubbed
all over the jamb of the door, above, below, and at each side, and round
the fireplace in the same way. it all seemed grotesque to me, and
presently i said:--

“well, professor, i know you always have a reason for what you do, but
this certainly puzzles me. it is well we have no sceptic here, or he
would say that you were working some spell to keep out an evil spirit.”

“perhaps i am!” he answered quietly as he began to make the wreath which
lucy was to wear round her neck.

we then waited whilst lucy made her toilet for the night, and when she
was in bed he came and himself fixed the wreath of garlic round her
neck. the last words he said to her were:--

“take care you do not disturb it; and even if the room feel close, do
not to-night open the window or the door.”

“i promise,” said lucy, “and thank you both a thousand times for all
your kindness to me! oh, what have i done to be blessed with such
friends?”

as we left the house in my fly, which was waiting, van helsing said:--

“to-night i can sleep in peace, and sleep i want--two nights of travel,
much reading in the day between, and much anxiety on the day to follow,
and a night to sit up, without to wink. to-morrow in the morning early
you call for me, and we come together to see our pretty miss, so much
more strong for my ‘spell’ which i have work. ho! ho!”

he seemed so confident that i, remembering my own confidence two nights
before and with the baneful result, felt awe and vague terror. it must
have been my weakness that made me hesitate to tell it to my friend, but
i felt it all the more, like unshed tears.




chapter xi

_lucy westenra’s diary._


_12 september._--how good they all are to me. i quite love that dear dr.
van helsing. i wonder why he was so anxious about these flowers. he
positively frightened me, he was so fierce. and yet he must have been
right, for i feel comfort from them already. somehow, i do not dread
being alone to-night, and i can go to sleep without fear. i shall not
mind any flapping outside the window. oh, the terrible struggle that i
have had against sleep so often of late; the pain of the sleeplessness,
or the pain of the fear of sleep, with such unknown horrors as it has
for me! how blessed are some people, whose lives have no fears, no
dreads; to whom sleep is a blessing that comes nightly, and brings
nothing but sweet dreams. well, here i am to-night, hoping for sleep,
and lying like ophelia in the play, with “virgin crants and maiden
strewments.” i never liked garlic before, but to-night it is delightful!
there is peace in its smell; i feel sleep coming already. good-night,
everybody.


_dr. seward’s diary._

_13 september._--called at the berkeley and found van helsing, as usual,
up to time. the carriage ordered from the hotel was waiting. the
professor took his bag, which he always brings with him now.

let all be put down exactly. van helsing and i arrived at hillingham at
eight o’clock. it was a lovely morning; the bright sunshine and all the
fresh feeling of early autumn seemed like the completion of nature’s
annual work. the leaves were turning to all kinds of beautiful colours,
but had not yet begun to drop from the trees. when we entered we met
mrs. westenra coming out of the morning room. she is always an early
riser. she greeted us warmly and said:--

“you will be glad to know that lucy is better. the dear child is still
asleep. i looked into her room and saw her, but did not go in, lest i
should disturb her.” the professor smiled, and looked quite jubilant. he
rubbed his hands together, and said:--

“aha! i thought i had diagnosed the case. my treatment is working,” to
which she answered:--

“you must not take all the credit to yourself, doctor. lucy’s state this
morning is due in part to me.”

“how you do mean, ma’am?” asked the professor.

“well, i was anxious about the dear child in the night, and went into
her room. she was sleeping soundly--so soundly that even my coming did
not wake her. but the room was awfully stuffy. there were a lot of those
horrible, strong-smelling flowers about everywhere, and she had actually
a bunch of them round her neck. i feared that the heavy odour would be
too much for the dear child in her weak state, so i took them all away
and opened a bit of the window to let in a little fresh air. you will be
pleased with her, i am sure.”

she moved off into her boudoir, where she usually breakfasted early. as
she had spoken, i watched the professor’s face, and saw it turn ashen
grey. he had been able to retain his self-command whilst the poor lady
was present, for he knew her state and how mischievous a shock would be;
he actually smiled on her as he held open the door for her to pass into
her room. but the instant she had disappeared he pulled me, suddenly and
forcibly, into the dining-room and closed the door.

then, for the first time in my life, i saw van helsing break down. he
raised his hands over his head in a sort of mute despair, and then beat
his palms together in a helpless way; finally he sat down on a chair,
and putting his hands before his face, began to sob, with loud, dry sobs
that seemed to come from the very racking of his heart. then he raised
his arms again, as though appealing to the whole universe. “god! god!
god!” he said. “what have we done, what has this poor thing done, that
we are so sore beset? is there fate amongst us still, sent down from the
pagan world of old, that such things must be, and in such way? this poor
mother, all unknowing, and all for the best as she think, does such
thing as lose her daughter body and soul; and we must not tell her, we
must not even warn her, or she die, and then both die. oh, how we are
beset! how are all the powers of the devils against us!” suddenly he
jumped to his feet. “come,” he said, “come, we must see and act. devils
or no devils, or all the devils at once, it matters not; we fight him
all the same.” he went to the hall-door for his bag; and together we
went up to lucy’s room.

once again i drew up the blind, whilst van helsing went towards the bed.
this time he did not start as he looked on the poor face with the same
awful, waxen pallor as before. he wore a look of stern sadness and
infinite pity.

“as i expected,” he murmured, with that hissing inspiration of his which
meant so much. without a word he went and locked the door, and then
began to set out on the little table the instruments for yet another
operation of transfusion of blood. i had long ago recognised the
necessity, and begun to take off my coat, but he stopped me with a
warning hand. “no!” he said. “to-day you must operate. i shall provide.
you are weakened already.” as he spoke he took off his coat and rolled
up his shirt-sleeve.

again the operation; again the narcotic; again some return of colour to
the ashy cheeks, and the regular breathing of healthy sleep. this time i
watched whilst van helsing recruited himself and rested.

presently he took an opportunity of telling mrs. westenra that she must
not remove anything from lucy’s room without consulting him; that the
flowers were of medicinal value, and that the breathing of their odour
was a part of the system of cure. then he took over the care of the case
himself, saying that he would watch this night and the next and would
send me word when to come.

after another hour lucy waked from her sleep, fresh and bright and
seemingly not much the worse for her terrible ordeal.

what does it all mean? i am beginning to wonder if my long habit of life
amongst the insane is beginning to tell upon my own brain.


_lucy westenra’s diary._

_17 september._--four days and nights of peace. i am getting so strong
again that i hardly know myself. it is as if i had passed through some
long nightmare, and had just awakened to see the beautiful sunshine and
feel the fresh air of the morning around me. i have a dim
half-remembrance of long, anxious times of waiting and fearing; darkness
in which there was not even the pain of hope to make present distress
more poignant: and then long spells of oblivion, and the rising back to
life as a diver coming up through a great press of water. since,
however, dr. van helsing has been with me, all this bad dreaming seems
to have passed away; the noises that used to frighten me out of my
wits--the flapping against the windows, the distant voices which seemed
so close to me, the harsh sounds that came from i know not where and
commanded me to do i know not what--have all ceased. i go to bed now
without any fear of sleep. i do not even try to keep awake. i have grown
quite fond of the garlic, and a boxful arrives for me every day from
haarlem. to-night dr. van helsing is going away, as he has to be for a
day in amsterdam. but i need not be watched; i am well enough to be left
alone. thank god for mother’s sake, and dear arthur’s, and for all our
friends who have been so kind! i shall not even feel the change, for
last night dr. van helsing slept in his chair a lot of the time. i found
him asleep twice when i awoke; but i did not fear to go to sleep again,
although the boughs or bats or something napped almost angrily against
the window-panes.


_“the pall mall gazette,” 18 september._

                           the escaped wolf.

         perilous adventure of our interviewer.

         _interview with the keeper in the zoölogical gardens._

after many inquiries and almost as many refusals, and perpetually using
the words “pall mall gazette” as a sort of talisman, i managed to find
the keeper of the section of the zoölogical gardens in which the wolf
department is included. thomas bilder lives in one of the cottages in
the enclosure behind the elephant-house, and was just sitting down to
his tea when i found him. thomas and his wife are hospitable folk,
elderly, and without children, and if the specimen i enjoyed of their
hospitality be of the average kind, their lives must be pretty
comfortable. the keeper would not enter on what he called “business”
until the supper was over, and we were all satisfied. then when the
table was cleared, and he had lit his pipe, he said:--

“now, sir, you can go on and arsk me what you want. you’ll excoose me
refoosin’ to talk of perfeshunal subjects afore meals. i gives the
wolves and the jackals and the hyenas in all our section their tea afore
i begins to arsk them questions.”

“how do you mean, ask them questions?” i queried, wishful to get him
into a talkative humour.

“’ittin’ of them over the ’ead with a pole is one way; scratchin’ of
their hears is another, when gents as is flush wants a bit of a show-orf
to their gals. i don’t so much mind the fust--the ’ittin’ with a pole
afore i chucks in their dinner; but i waits till they’ve ’ad their
sherry and kawffee, so to speak, afore i tries on with the
ear-scratchin’. mind you,” he added philosophically, “there’s a deal of
the same nature in us as in them theer animiles. here’s you a-comin’ and
arskin’ of me questions about my business, and i that grumpy-like that
only for your bloomin’ ’arf-quid i’d ’a’ seen you blowed fust ’fore i’d
answer. not even when you arsked me sarcastic-like if i’d like you to
arsk the superintendent if you might arsk me questions. without offence
did i tell yer to go to ’ell?”

“you did.”

“an’ when you said you’d report me for usin’ of obscene language that
was ’ittin’ me over the ’ead; but the ’arf-quid made that all right. i
weren’t a-goin’ to fight, so i waited for the food, and did with my ’owl
as the wolves, and lions, and tigers does. but, lor’ love yer ’art, now
that the old ’ooman has stuck a chunk of her tea-cake in me, an’ rinsed
me out with her bloomin’ old teapot, and i’ve lit hup, you may scratch
my ears for all you’re worth, and won’t git even a growl out of me.
drive along with your questions. i know what yer a-comin’ at, that ’ere
escaped wolf.”

“exactly. i want you to give me your view of it. just tell me how it
happened; and when i know the facts i’ll get you to say what you
consider was the cause of it, and how you think the whole affair will
end.”

“all right, guv’nor. this ’ere is about the ’ole story. that ’ere wolf
what we called bersicker was one of three grey ones that came from
norway to jamrach’s, which we bought off him four years ago. he was a
nice well-behaved wolf, that never gave no trouble to talk of. i’m more
surprised at ’im for wantin’ to get out nor any other animile in the
place. but, there, you can’t trust wolves no more nor women.”

“don’t you mind him, sir!” broke in mrs. tom, with a cheery laugh. “’e’s
got mindin’ the animiles so long that blest if he ain’t like a old wolf
’isself! but there ain’t no ’arm in ’im.”

“well, sir, it was about two hours after feedin’ yesterday when i first
hear my disturbance. i was makin’ up a litter in the monkey-house for a
young puma which is ill; but when i heard the yelpin’ and ’owlin’ i kem
away straight. there was bersicker a-tearin’ like a mad thing at the
bars as if he wanted to get out. there wasn’t much people about that
day, and close at hand was only one man, a tall, thin chap, with a ’ook
nose and a pointed beard, with a few white hairs runnin’ through it. he
had a ’ard, cold look and red eyes, and i took a sort of mislike to him,
for it seemed as if it was ’im as they was hirritated at. he ’ad white
kid gloves on ’is ’ands, and he pointed out the animiles to me and says:
‘keeper, these wolves seem upset at something.’

“‘maybe it’s you,’ says i, for i did not like the airs as he give
’isself. he didn’t git angry, as i ’oped he would, but he smiled a kind
of insolent smile, with a mouth full of white, sharp teeth. ‘oh no, they
wouldn’t like me,’ ’e says.

“‘ow yes, they would,’ says i, a-imitatin’ of him. ‘they always likes a
bone or two to clean their teeth on about tea-time, which you ’as a
bagful.’

“well, it was a odd thing, but when the animiles see us a-talkin’ they
lay down, and when i went over to bersicker he let me stroke his ears
same as ever. that there man kem over, and blessed but if he didn’t put
in his hand and stroke the old wolf’s ears too!

“‘tyke care,’ says i. ‘bersicker is quick.’

“‘never mind,’ he says. ‘i’m used to ’em!’

“‘are you in the business yourself?’ i says, tyking off my ’at, for a
man what trades in wolves, anceterer, is a good friend to keepers.

“‘no,’ says he, ‘not exactly in the business, but i ’ave made pets of
several.’ and with that he lifts his ’at as perlite as a lord, and walks
away. old bersicker kep’ a-lookin’ arter ’im till ’e was out of sight,
and then went and lay down in a corner and wouldn’t come hout the ’ole
hevening. well, larst night, so soon as the moon was hup, the wolves
here all began a-’owling. there warn’t nothing for them to ’owl at.
there warn’t no one near, except some one that was evidently a-callin’ a
dog somewheres out back of the gardings in the park road. once or twice
i went out to see that all was right, and it was, and then the ’owling
stopped. just before twelve o’clock i just took a look round afore
turnin’ in, an’, bust me, but when i kem opposite to old bersicker’s
cage i see the rails broken and twisted about and the cage empty. and
that’s all i know for certing.”

“did any one else see anything?”

“one of our gard’ners was a-comin’ ’ome about that time from a ’armony,
when he sees a big grey dog comin’ out through the garding ’edges. at
least, so he says, but i don’t give much for it myself, for if he did ’e
never said a word about it to his missis when ’e got ’ome, and it was
only after the escape of the wolf was made known, and we had been up all
night-a-huntin’ of the park for bersicker, that he remembered seein’
anything. my own belief was that the ’armony ’ad got into his ’ead.”

“now, mr. bilder, can you account in any way for the escape of the
wolf?”

“well, sir,” he said, with a suspicious sort of modesty, “i think i can;
but i don’t know as ’ow you’d be satisfied with the theory.”

“certainly i shall. if a man like you, who knows the animals from
experience, can’t hazard a good guess at any rate, who is even to try?”

“well then, sir, i accounts for it this way; it seems to me that ’ere
wolf escaped--simply because he wanted to get out.”

from the hearty way that both thomas and his wife laughed at the joke i
could see that it had done service before, and that the whole
explanation was simply an elaborate sell. i couldn’t cope in badinage
with the worthy thomas, but i thought i knew a surer way to his heart,
so i said:--

“now, mr. bilder, we’ll consider that first half-sovereign worked off,
and this brother of his is waiting to be claimed when you’ve told me
what you think will happen.”

“right y’are, sir,” he said briskly. “ye’ll excoose me, i know, for
a-chaffin’ of ye, but the old woman here winked at me, which was as much
as telling me to go on.”

“well, i never!” said the old lady.

“my opinion is this: that ’ere wolf is a-’idin’ of, somewheres. the
gard’ner wot didn’t remember said he was a-gallopin’ northward faster
than a horse could go; but i don’t believe him, for, yer see, sir,
wolves don’t gallop no more nor dogs does, they not bein’ built that
way. wolves is fine things in a storybook, and i dessay when they gets
in packs and does be chivyin’ somethin’ that’s more afeared than they is
they can make a devil of a noise and chop it up, whatever it is. but,
lor’ bless you, in real life a wolf is only a low creature, not half so
clever or bold as a good dog; and not half a quarter so much fight in
’im. this one ain’t been used to fightin’ or even to providin’ for
hisself, and more like he’s somewhere round the park a-’idin’ an’
a-shiverin’ of, and, if he thinks at all, wonderin’ where he is to get
his breakfast from; or maybe he’s got down some area and is in a
coal-cellar. my eye, won’t some cook get a rum start when she sees his
green eyes a-shining at her out of the dark! if he can’t get food he’s
bound to look for it, and mayhap he may chance to light on a butcher’s
shop in time. if he doesn’t, and some nursemaid goes a-walkin’ orf with
a soldier, leavin’ of the hinfant in the perambulator--well, then i
shouldn’t be surprised if the census is one babby the less. that’s
all.”

i was handing him the half-sovereign, when something came bobbing up
against the window, and mr. bilder’s face doubled its natural length
with surprise.

“god bless me!” he said. “if there ain’t old bersicker come back by
’isself!”

he went to the door and opened it; a most unnecessary proceeding it
seemed to me. i have always thought that a wild animal never looks so
well as when some obstacle of pronounced durability is between us; a
personal experience has intensified rather than diminished that idea.

after all, however, there is nothing like custom, for neither bilder nor
his wife thought any more of the wolf than i should of a dog. the animal
itself was as peaceful and well-behaved as that father of all
picture-wolves--red riding hood’s quondam friend, whilst moving her
confidence in masquerade.

the whole scene was an unutterable mixture of comedy and pathos. the
wicked wolf that for half a day had paralysed london and set all the
children in the town shivering in their shoes, was there in a sort of
penitent mood, and was received and petted like a sort of vulpine
prodigal son. old bilder examined him all over with most tender
solicitude, and when he had finished with his penitent said:--

“there, i knew the poor old chap would get into some kind of trouble;
didn’t i say it all along? here’s his head all cut and full of broken
glass. ’e’s been a-gettin’ over some bloomin’ wall or other. it’s a
shyme that people are allowed to top their walls with broken bottles.
this ’ere’s what comes of it. come along, bersicker.”

he took the wolf and locked him up in a cage, with a piece of meat that
satisfied, in quantity at any rate, the elementary conditions of the
fatted calf, and went off to report.

i came off, too, to report the only exclusive information that is given
to-day regarding the strange escapade at the zoo.


_dr. seward’s diary._

_17 september._--i was engaged after dinner in my study posting up my
books, which, through press of other work and the many visits to lucy,
had fallen sadly into arrear. suddenly the door was burst open, and in
rushed my patient, with his face distorted with passion. i was
thunderstruck, for such a thing as a patient getting of his own accord
into the superintendent’s study is almost unknown. without an instant’s
pause he made straight at me. he had a dinner-knife in his hand, and,
as i saw he was dangerous, i tried to keep the table between us. he was
too quick and too strong for me, however; for before i could get my
balance he had struck at me and cut my left wrist rather severely.
before he could strike again, however, i got in my right and he was
sprawling on his back on the floor. my wrist bled freely, and quite a
little pool trickled on to the carpet. i saw that my friend was not
intent on further effort, and occupied myself binding up my wrist,
keeping a wary eye on the prostrate figure all the time. when the
attendants rushed in, and we turned our attention to him, his employment
positively sickened me. he was lying on his belly on the floor licking
up, like a dog, the blood which had fallen from my wounded wrist. he was
easily secured, and, to my surprise, went with the attendants quite
placidly, simply repeating over and over again: “the blood is the life!
the blood is the life!”

i cannot afford to lose blood just at present; i have lost too much of
late for my physical good, and then the prolonged strain of lucy’s
illness and its horrible phases is telling on me. i am over-excited and
weary, and i need rest, rest, rest. happily van helsing has not summoned
me, so i need not forego my sleep; to-night i could not well do without
it.


_telegram, van helsing, antwerp, to seward, carfax._

(sent to carfax, sussex, as no county given; delivered late by
twenty-two hours.)

“_17 september._--do not fail to be at hillingham to-night. if not
watching all the time frequently, visit and see that flowers are as
placed; very important; do not fail. shall be with you as soon as
possible after arrival.”


_dr. seward’s diary._

_18 september._--just off for train to london. the arrival of van
helsing’s telegram filled me with dismay. a whole night lost, and i know
by bitter experience what may happen in a night. of course it is
possible that all may be well, but what _may_ have happened? surely
there is some horrible doom hanging over us that every possible accident
should thwart us in all we try to do. i shall take this cylinder with
me, and then i can complete my entry on lucy’s phonograph.


_memorandum left by lucy westenra._

_17 september. night._--i write this and leave it to be seen, so that no
one may by any chance get into trouble through me. this is an exact
record of what took place to-night. i feel i am dying of weakness, and
have barely strength to write, but it must be done if i die in the
doing.

i went to bed as usual, taking care that the flowers were placed as dr.
van helsing directed, and soon fell asleep.

i was waked by the flapping at the window, which had begun after that
sleep-walking on the cliff at whitby when mina saved me, and which now i
know so well. i was not afraid, but i did wish that dr. seward was in
the next room--as dr. van helsing said he would be--so that i might have
called him. i tried to go to sleep, but could not. then there came to me
the old fear of sleep, and i determined to keep awake. perversely sleep
would try to come then when i did not want it; so, as i feared to be
alone, i opened my door and called out: “is there anybody there?” there
was no answer. i was afraid to wake mother, and so closed my door again.
then outside in the shrubbery i heard a sort of howl like a dog’s, but
more fierce and deeper. i went to the window and looked out, but could
see nothing, except a big bat, which had evidently been buffeting its
wings against the window. so i went back to bed again, but determined
not to go to sleep. presently the door opened, and mother looked in;
seeing by my moving that i was not asleep, came in, and sat by me. she
said to me even more sweetly and softly than her wont:--

“i was uneasy about you, darling, and came in to see that you were all
right.”

i feared she might catch cold sitting there, and asked her to come in
and sleep with me, so she came into bed, and lay down beside me; she did
not take off her dressing gown, for she said she would only stay a while
and then go back to her own bed. as she lay there in my arms, and i in
hers, the flapping and buffeting came to the window again. she was
startled and a little frightened, and cried out: “what is that?” i tried
to pacify her, and at last succeeded, and she lay quiet; but i could
hear her poor dear heart still beating terribly. after a while there was
the low howl again out in the shrubbery, and shortly after there was a
crash at the window, and a lot of broken glass was hurled on the floor.
the window blind blew back with the wind that rushed in, and in the
aperture of the broken panes there was the head of a great, gaunt grey
wolf. mother cried out in a fright, and struggled up into a sitting
posture, and clutched wildly at anything that would help her. amongst
other things, she clutched the wreath of flowers that dr. van helsing
insisted on my wearing round my neck, and tore it away from me. for a
second or two she sat up, pointing at the wolf, and there was a strange
and horrible gurgling in her throat; then she fell over--as if struck
with lightning, and her head hit my forehead and made me dizzy for a
moment or two. the room and all round seemed to spin round. i kept my
eyes fixed on the window, but the wolf drew his head back, and a whole
myriad of little specks seemed to come blowing in through the broken
window, and wheeling and circling round like the pillar of dust that
travellers describe when there is a simoon in the desert. i tried to
stir, but there was some spell upon me, and dear mother’s poor body,
which seemed to grow cold already--for her dear heart had ceased to
beat--weighed me down; and i remembered no more for a while.

the time did not seem long, but very, very awful, till i recovered
consciousness again. somewhere near, a passing bell was tolling; the
dogs all round the neighbourhood were howling; and in our shrubbery,
seemingly just outside, a nightingale was singing. i was dazed and
stupid with pain and terror and weakness, but the sound of the
nightingale seemed like the voice of my dead mother come back to comfort
me. the sounds seemed to have awakened the maids, too, for i could hear
their bare feet pattering outside my door. i called to them, and they
came in, and when they saw what had happened, and what it was that lay
over me on the bed, they screamed out. the wind rushed in through the
broken window, and the door slammed to. they lifted off the body of my
dear mother, and laid her, covered up with a sheet, on the bed after i
had got up. they were all so frightened and nervous that i directed them
to go to the dining-room and have each a glass of wine. the door flew
open for an instant and closed again. the maids shrieked, and then went
in a body to the dining-room; and i laid what flowers i had on my dear
mother’s breast. when they were there i remembered what dr. van helsing
had told me, but i didn’t like to remove them, and, besides, i would
have some of the servants to sit up with me now. i was surprised that
the maids did not come back. i called them, but got no answer, so i went
to the dining-room to look for them.

my heart sank when i saw what had happened. they all four lay helpless
on the floor, breathing heavily. the decanter of sherry was on the table
half full, but there was a queer, acrid smell about. i was suspicious,
and examined the decanter. it smelt of laudanum, and looking on the
sideboard, i found that the bottle which mother’s doctor uses for
her--oh! did use--was empty. what am i to do? what am i to do? i am back
in the room with mother. i cannot leave her, and i am alone, save for
the sleeping servants, whom some one has drugged. alone with the dead! i
dare not go out, for i can hear the low howl of the wolf through the
broken window.

the air seems full of specks, floating and circling in the draught from
the window, and the lights burn blue and dim. what am i to do? god
shield me from harm this night! i shall hide this paper in my breast,
where they shall find it when they come to lay me out. my dear mother
gone! it is time that i go too. good-bye, dear arthur, if i should not
survive this night. god keep you, dear, and god help me!




chapter xii

dr. seward’s diary


_18 september._--i drove at once to hillingham and arrived early.
keeping my cab at the gate, i went up the avenue alone. i knocked gently
and rang as quietly as possible, for i feared to disturb lucy or her
mother, and hoped to only bring a servant to the door. after a while,
finding no response, i knocked and rang again; still no answer. i cursed
the laziness of the servants that they should lie abed at such an
hour--for it was now ten o’clock--and so rang and knocked again, but
more impatiently, but still without response. hitherto i had blamed only
the servants, but now a terrible fear began to assail me. was this
desolation but another link in the chain of doom which seemed drawing
tight around us? was it indeed a house of death to which i had come, too
late? i knew that minutes, even seconds of delay, might mean hours of
danger to lucy, if she had had again one of those frightful relapses;
and i went round the house to try if i could find by chance an entry
anywhere.

i could find no means of ingress. every window and door was fastened and
locked, and i returned baffled to the porch. as i did so, i heard the
rapid pit-pat of a swiftly driven horse’s feet. they stopped at the
gate, and a few seconds later i met van helsing running up the avenue.
when he saw me, he gasped out:--

“then it was you, and just arrived. how is she? are we too late? did you
not get my telegram?”

i answered as quickly and coherently as i could that i had only got his
telegram early in the morning, and had not lost a minute in coming here,
and that i could not make any one in the house hear me. he paused and
raised his hat as he said solemnly:--

“then i fear we are too late. god’s will be done!” with his usual
recuperative energy, he went on: “come. if there be no way open to get
in, we must make one. time is all in all to us now.”

we went round to the back of the house, where there was a kitchen
window. the professor took a small surgical saw from his case, and
handing it to me, pointed to the iron bars which guarded the window. i
attacked them at once and had very soon cut through three of them. then
with a long, thin knife we pushed back the fastening of the sashes and
opened the window. i helped the professor in, and followed him. there
was no one in the kitchen or in the servants’ rooms, which were close at
hand. we tried all the rooms as we went along, and in the dining-room,
dimly lit by rays of light through the shutters, found four
servant-women lying on the floor. there was no need to think them dead,
for their stertorous breathing and the acrid smell of laudanum in the
room left no doubt as to their condition. van helsing and i looked at
each other, and as we moved away he said: “we can attend to them later.”
then we ascended to lucy’s room. for an instant or two we paused at the
door to listen, but there was no sound that we could hear. with white
faces and trembling hands, we opened the door gently, and entered the
room.

how shall i describe what we saw? on the bed lay two women, lucy and her
mother. the latter lay farthest in, and she was covered with a white
sheet, the edge of which had been blown back by the draught through the
broken window, showing the drawn, white face, with a look of terror
fixed upon it. by her side lay lucy, with face white and still more
drawn. the flowers which had been round her neck we found upon her
mother’s bosom, and her throat was bare, showing the two little wounds
which we had noticed before, but looking horribly white and mangled.
without a word the professor bent over the bed, his head almost touching
poor lucy’s breast; then he gave a quick turn of his head, as of one who
listens, and leaping to his feet, he cried out to me:--

“it is not yet too late! quick! quick! bring the brandy!”

i flew downstairs and returned with it, taking care to smell and taste
it, lest it, too, were drugged like the decanter of sherry which i found
on the table. the maids were still breathing, but more restlessly, and i
fancied that the narcotic was wearing off. i did not stay to make sure,
but returned to van helsing. he rubbed the brandy, as on another
occasion, on her lips and gums and on her wrists and the palms of her
hands. he said to me:--

“i can do this, all that can be at the present. you go wake those maids.
flick them in the face with a wet towel, and flick them hard. make them
get heat and fire and a warm bath. this poor soul is nearly as cold as
that beside her. she will need be heated before we can do anything
more.”

i went at once, and found little difficulty in waking three of the
women. the fourth was only a young girl, and the drug had evidently
affected her more strongly, so i lifted her on the sofa and let her
sleep. the others were dazed at first, but as remembrance came back to
them they cried and sobbed in a hysterical manner. i was stern with
them, however, and would not let them talk. i told them that one life
was bad enough to lose, and that if they delayed they would sacrifice
miss lucy. so, sobbing and crying, they went about their way, half clad
as they were, and prepared fire and water. fortunately, the kitchen and
boiler fires were still alive, and there was no lack of hot water. we
got a bath and carried lucy out as she was and placed her in it. whilst
we were busy chafing her limbs there was a knock at the hall door. one
of the maids ran off, hurried on some more clothes, and opened it. then
she returned and whispered to us that there was a gentleman who had come
with a message from mr. holmwood. i bade her simply tell him that he
must wait, for we could see no one now. she went away with the message,
and, engrossed with our work, i clean forgot all about him.

i never saw in all my experience the professor work in such deadly
earnest. i knew--as he knew--that it was a stand-up fight with death,
and in a pause told him so. he answered me in a way that i did not
understand, but with the sternest look that his face could wear:--

“if that were all, i would stop here where we are now, and let her fade
away into peace, for i see no light in life over her horizon.” he went
on with his work with, if possible, renewed and more frenzied vigour.

presently we both began to be conscious that the heat was beginning to
be of some effect. lucy’s heart beat a trifle more audibly to the
stethoscope, and her lungs had a perceptible movement. van helsing’s
face almost beamed, and as we lifted her from the bath and rolled her in
a hot sheet to dry her he said to me:--

“the first gain is ours! check to the king!”

we took lucy into another room, which had by now been prepared, and laid
her in bed and forced a few drops of brandy down her throat. i noticed
that van helsing tied a soft silk handkerchief round her throat. she was
still unconscious, and was quite as bad as, if not worse than, we had
ever seen her.

van helsing called in one of the women, and told her to stay with her
and not to take her eyes off her till we returned, and then beckoned me
out of the room.

“we must consult as to what is to be done,” he said as we descended the
stairs. in the hall he opened the dining-room door, and we passed in, he
closing the door carefully behind him. the shutters had been opened, but
the blinds were already down, with that obedience to the etiquette of
death which the british woman of the lower classes always rigidly
observes. the room was, therefore, dimly dark. it was, however, light
enough for our purposes. van helsing’s sternness was somewhat relieved
by a look of perplexity. he was evidently torturing his mind about
something, so i waited for an instant, and he spoke:--

“what are we to do now? where are we to turn for help? we must have
another transfusion of blood, and that soon, or that poor girl’s life
won’t be worth an hour’s purchase. you are exhausted already; i am
exhausted too. i fear to trust those women, even if they would have
courage to submit. what are we to do for some one who will open his
veins for her?”

“what’s the matter with me, anyhow?”

the voice came from the sofa across the room, and its tones brought
relief and joy to my heart, for they were those of quincey morris. van
helsing started angrily at the first sound, but his face softened and a
glad look came into his eyes as i cried out: “quincey morris!” and
rushed towards him with outstretched hands.

“what brought you here?” i cried as our hands met.

“i guess art is the cause.”

he handed me a telegram:--

“have not heard from seward for three days, and am terribly anxious.
cannot leave. father still in same condition. send me word how lucy is.
do not delay.--holmwood.”

“i think i came just in the nick of time. you know you have only to tell
me what to do.”

van helsing strode forward, and took his hand, looking him straight in
the eyes as he said:--

“a brave man’s blood is the best thing on this earth when a woman is in
trouble. you’re a man and no mistake. well, the devil may work against
us for all he’s worth, but god sends us men when we want them.”

once again we went through that ghastly operation. i have not the heart
to go through with the details. lucy had got a terrible shock and it
told on her more than before, for though plenty of blood went into her
veins, her body did not respond to the treatment as well as on the other
occasions. her struggle back into life was something frightful to see
and hear. however, the action of both heart and lungs improved, and van
helsing made a subcutaneous injection of morphia, as before, and with
good effect. her faint became a profound slumber. the professor watched
whilst i went downstairs with quincey morris, and sent one of the maids
to pay off one of the cabmen who were waiting. i left quincey lying down
after having a glass of wine, and told the cook to get ready a good
breakfast. then a thought struck me, and i went back to the room where
lucy now was. when i came softly in, i found van helsing with a sheet or
two of note-paper in his hand. he had evidently read it, and was
thinking it over as he sat with his hand to his brow. there was a look
of grim satisfaction in his face, as of one who has had a doubt solved.
he handed me the paper saying only: “it dropped from lucy’s breast when
we carried her to the bath.”

when i had read it, i stood looking at the professor, and after a pause
asked him: “in god’s name, what does it all mean? was she, or is she,
mad; or what sort of horrible danger is it?” i was so bewildered that i
did not know what to say more. van helsing put out his hand and took the
paper, saying:--

“do not trouble about it now. forget it for the present. you shall know
and understand it all in good time; but it will be later. and now what
is it that you came to me to say?” this brought me back to fact, and i
was all myself again.

“i came to speak about the certificate of death. if we do not act
properly and wisely, there may be an inquest, and that paper would have
to be produced. i am in hopes that we need have no inquest, for if we
had it would surely kill poor lucy, if nothing else did. i know, and you
know, and the other doctor who attended her knows, that mrs. westenra
had disease of the heart, and we can certify that she died of it. let us
fill up the certificate at once, and i shall take it myself to the
registrar and go on to the undertaker.”

“good, oh my friend john! well thought of! truly miss lucy, if she be
sad in the foes that beset her, is at least happy in the friends that
love her. one, two, three, all open their veins for her, besides one old
man. ah yes, i know, friend john; i am not blind! i love you all the
more for it! now go.”

in the hall i met quincey morris, with a telegram for arthur telling him
that mrs. westenra was dead; that lucy also had been ill, but was now
going on better; and that van helsing and i were with her. i told him
where i was going, and he hurried me out, but as i was going said:--

“when you come back, jack, may i have two words with you all to
ourselves?” i nodded in reply and went out. i found no difficulty about
the registration, and arranged with the local undertaker to come up in
the evening to measure for the coffin and to make arrangements.

when i got back quincey was waiting for me. i told him i would see him
as soon as i knew about lucy, and went up to her room. she was still
sleeping, and the professor seemingly had not moved from his seat at her
side. from his putting his finger to his lips, i gathered that he
expected her to wake before long and was afraid of forestalling nature.
so i went down to quincey and took him into the breakfast-room, where
the blinds were not drawn down, and which was a little more cheerful, or
rather less cheerless, than the other rooms. when we were alone, he said
to me:--

“jack seward, i don’t want to shove myself in anywhere where i’ve no
right to be; but this is no ordinary case. you know i loved that girl
and wanted to marry her; but, although that’s all past and gone, i can’t
help feeling anxious about her all the same. what is it that’s wrong
with her? the dutchman--and a fine old fellow he is; i can see
that--said, that time you two came into the room, that you must have
_another_ transfusion of blood, and that both you and he were exhausted.
now i know well that you medical men speak _in camera_, and that a man
must not expect to know what they consult about in private. but this is
no common matter, and, whatever it is, i have done my part. is not that
so?”

“that’s so,” i said, and he went on:--

“i take it that both you and van helsing had done already what i did
to-day. is not that so?”

“that’s so.”

“and i guess art was in it too. when i saw him four days ago down at his
own place he looked queer. i have not seen anything pulled down so quick
since i was on the pampas and had a mare that i was fond of go to grass
all in a night. one of those big bats that they call vampires had got at
her in the night, and what with his gorge and the vein left open, there
wasn’t enough blood in her to let her stand up, and i had to put a
bullet through her as she lay. jack, if you may tell me without
betraying confidence, arthur was the first, is not that so?” as he spoke
the poor fellow looked terribly anxious. he was in a torture of suspense
regarding the woman he loved, and his utter ignorance of the terrible
mystery which seemed to surround her intensified his pain. his very
heart was bleeding, and it took all the manhood of him--and there was a
royal lot of it, too--to keep him from breaking down. i paused before
answering, for i felt that i must not betray anything which the
professor wished kept secret; but already he knew so much, and guessed
so much, that there could be no reason for not answering, so i answered
in the same phrase: “that’s so.”

“and how long has this been going on?”

“about ten days.”

“ten days! then i guess, jack seward, that that poor pretty creature
that we all love has had put into her veins within that time the blood
of four strong men. man alive, her whole body wouldn’t hold it.” then,
coming close to me, he spoke in a fierce half-whisper: “what took it
out?”

i shook my head. “that,” i said, “is the crux. van helsing is simply
frantic about it, and i am at my wits’ end. i can’t even hazard a guess.
there has been a series of little circumstances which have thrown out
all our calculations as to lucy being properly watched. but these shall
not occur again. here we stay until all be well--or ill.” quincey held
out his hand. “count me in,” he said. “you and the dutchman will tell me
what to do, and i’ll do it.”

when she woke late in the afternoon, lucy’s first movement was to feel
in her breast, and, to my surprise, produced the paper which van helsing
had given me to read. the careful professor had replaced it where it had
come from, lest on waking she should be alarmed. her eye then lit on van
helsing and on me too, and gladdened. then she looked around the room,
and seeing where she was, shuddered; she gave a loud cry, and put her
poor thin hands before her pale face. we both understood what that
meant--that she had realised to the full her mother’s death; so we tried
what we could to comfort her. doubtless sympathy eased her somewhat, but
she was very low in thought and spirit, and wept silently and weakly for
a long time. we told her that either or both of us would now remain with
her all the time, and that seemed to comfort her. towards dusk she fell
into a doze. here a very odd thing occurred. whilst still asleep she
took the paper from her breast and tore it in two. van helsing stepped
over and took the pieces from her. all the same, however, she went on
with the action of tearing, as though the material were still in her
hands; finally she lifted her hands and opened them as though scattering
the fragments. van helsing seemed surprised, and his brows gathered as
if in thought, but he said nothing.

       *       *       *       *       *

_19 september._--all last night she slept fitfully, being always afraid
to sleep, and something weaker when she woke from it. the professor and
i took it in turns to watch, and we never left her for a moment
unattended. quincey morris said nothing about his intention, but i knew
that all night long he patrolled round and round the house.

when the day came, its searching light showed the ravages in poor lucy’s
strength. she was hardly able to turn her head, and the little
nourishment which she could take seemed to do her no good. at times she
slept, and both van helsing and i noticed the difference in her, between
sleeping and waking. whilst asleep she looked stronger, although more
haggard, and her breathing was softer; her open mouth showed the pale
gums drawn back from the teeth, which thus looked positively longer and
sharper than usual; when she woke the softness of her eyes evidently
changed the expression, for she looked her own self, although a dying
one. in the afternoon she asked for arthur, and we telegraphed for him.
quincey went off to meet him at the station.

when he arrived it was nearly six o’clock, and the sun was setting full
and warm, and the red light streamed in through the window and gave more
colour to the pale cheeks. when he saw her, arthur was simply choking
with emotion, and none of us could speak. in the hours that had passed,
the fits of sleep, or the comatose condition that passed for it, had
grown more frequent, so that the pauses when conversation was possible
were shortened. arthur’s presence, however, seemed to act as a
stimulant; she rallied a little, and spoke to him more brightly than she
had done since we arrived. he too pulled himself together, and spoke as
cheerily as he could, so that the best was made of everything.

it was now nearly one o’clock, and he and van helsing are sitting with
her. i am to relieve them in a quarter of an hour, and i am entering
this on lucy’s phonograph. until six o’clock they are to try to rest. i
fear that to-morrow will end our watching, for the shock has been too
great; the poor child cannot rally. god help us all.


_letter, mina harker to lucy westenra._

(unopened by her.)

“_17 september._

“my dearest lucy,--

“it seems _an age_ since i heard from you, or indeed since i wrote. you
will pardon me, i know, for all my faults when you have read all my
budget of news. well, i got my husband back all right; when we arrived
at exeter there was a carriage waiting for us, and in it, though he had
an attack of gout, mr. hawkins. he took us to his house, where there
were rooms for us all nice and comfortable, and we dined together. after
dinner mr. hawkins said:--

“‘my dears, i want to drink your health and prosperity; and may every
blessing attend you both. i know you both from children, and have, with
love and pride, seen you grow up. now i want you to make your home here
with me. i have left to me neither chick nor child; all are gone, and in
my will i have left you everything.’ i cried, lucy dear, as jonathan and
the old man clasped hands. our evening was a very, very happy one.

“so here we are, installed in this beautiful old house, and from both my
bedroom and the drawing-room i can see the great elms of the cathedral
close, with their great black stems standing out against the old yellow
stone of the cathedral and i can hear the rooks overhead cawing and
cawing and chattering and gossiping all day, after the manner of
rooks--and humans. i am busy, i need not tell you, arranging things and
housekeeping. jonathan and mr. hawkins are busy all day; for, now that
jonathan is a partner, mr. hawkins wants to tell him all about the
clients.

“how is your dear mother getting on? i wish i could run up to town for a
day or two to see you, dear, but i dare not go yet, with so much on my
shoulders; and jonathan wants looking after still. he is beginning to
put some flesh on his bones again, but he was terribly weakened by the
long illness; even now he sometimes starts out of his sleep in a sudden
way and awakes all trembling until i can coax him back to his usual
placidity. however, thank god, these occasions grow less frequent as the
days go on, and they will in time pass away altogether, i trust. and now
i have told you my news, let me ask yours. when are you to be married,
and where, and who is to perform the ceremony, and what are you to wear,
and is it to be a public or a private wedding? tell me all about it,
dear; tell me all about everything, for there is nothing which interests
you which will not be dear to me. jonathan asks me to send his
‘respectful duty,’ but i do not think that is good enough from the
junior partner of the important firm hawkins & harker; and so, as you
love me, and he loves me, and i love you with all the moods and tenses
of the verb, i send you simply his ‘love’ instead. good-bye, my dearest
lucy, and all blessings on you.

“yours,

“mina harker.”


_report from patrick hennessey, m. d., m. r. c. s. l. k. q. c. p. i.,
etc., etc., to john seward, m. d._

“_20 september._

“my dear sir,--

“in accordance with your wishes, i enclose report of the conditions of
everything left in my charge.... with regard to patient, renfield, there
is more to say. he has had another outbreak, which might have had a
dreadful ending, but which, as it fortunately happened, was unattended
with any unhappy results. this afternoon a carrier’s cart with two men
made a call at the empty house whose grounds abut on ours--the house to
which, you will remember, the patient twice ran away. the men stopped at
our gate to ask the porter their way, as they were strangers. i was
myself looking out of the study window, having a smoke after dinner, and
saw one of them come up to the house. as he passed the window of
renfield’s room, the patient began to rate him from within, and called
him all the foul names he could lay his tongue to. the man, who seemed a
decent fellow enough, contented himself by telling him to “shut up for a
foul-mouthed beggar,” whereon our man accused him of robbing him and
wanting to murder him and said that he would hinder him if he were to
swing for it. i opened the window and signed to the man not to notice,
so he contented himself after looking the place over and making up his
mind as to what kind of a place he had got to by saying: ‘lor’ bless
yer, sir, i wouldn’t mind what was said to me in a bloomin’ madhouse. i
pity ye and the guv’nor for havin’ to live in the house with a wild
beast like that.’ then he asked his way civilly enough, and i told him
where the gate of the empty house was; he went away, followed by threats
and curses and revilings from our man. i went down to see if i could
make out any cause for his anger, since he is usually such a
well-behaved man, and except his violent fits nothing of the kind had
ever occurred. i found him, to my astonishment, quite composed and most
genial in his manner. i tried to get him to talk of the incident, but he
blandly asked me questions as to what i meant, and led me to believe
that he was completely oblivious of the affair. it was, i am sorry to
say, however, only another instance of his cunning, for within half an
hour i heard of him again. this time he had broken out through the
window of his room, and was running down the avenue. i called to the
attendants to follow me, and ran after him, for i feared he was intent
on some mischief. my fear was justified when i saw the same cart which
had passed before coming down the road, having on it some great wooden
boxes. the men were wiping their foreheads, and were flushed in the
face, as if with violent exercise. before i could get up to him the
patient rushed at them, and pulling one of them off the cart, began to
knock his head against the ground. if i had not seized him just at the
moment i believe he would have killed the man there and then. the other
fellow jumped down and struck him over the head with the butt-end of his
heavy whip. it was a terrible blow; but he did not seem to mind it, but
seized him also, and struggled with the three of us, pulling us to and
fro as if we were kittens. you know i am no light weight, and the others
were both burly men. at first he was silent in his fighting; but as we
began to master him, and the attendants were putting a strait-waistcoat
on him, he began to shout: ‘i’ll frustrate them! they shan’t rob me!
they shan’t murder me by inches! i’ll fight for my lord and master!’ and
all sorts of similar incoherent ravings. it was with very considerable
difficulty that they got him back to the house and put him in the padded
room. one of the attendants, hardy, had a finger broken. however, i set
it all right; and he is going on well.

“the two carriers were at first loud in their threats of actions for
damages, and promised to rain all the penalties of the law on us. their
threats were, however, mingled with some sort of indirect apology for
the defeat of the two of them by a feeble madman. they said that if it
had not been for the way their strength had been spent in carrying and
raising the heavy boxes to the cart they would have made short work of
him. they gave as another reason for their defeat the extraordinary
state of drouth to which they had been reduced by the dusty nature of
their occupation and the reprehensible distance from the scene of their
labours of any place of public entertainment. i quite understood their
drift, and after a stiff glass of grog, or rather more of the same, and
with each a sovereign in hand, they made light of the attack, and swore
that they would encounter a worse madman any day for the pleasure of
meeting so ‘bloomin’ good a bloke’ as your correspondent. i took their
names and addresses, in case they might be needed. they are as
follows:--jack smollet, of dudding’s rents, king george’s road, great
walworth, and thomas snelling, peter farley’s row, guide court, bethnal
green. they are both in the employment of harris & sons, moving and
shipment company, orange master’s yard, soho.

“i shall report to you any matter of interest occurring here, and shall
wire you at once if there is anything of importance.

“believe me, dear sir,

“yours faithfully,

“patrick hennessey.”


_letter, mina harker to lucy westenra_.

(unopened by her.)

“_18 september._

“my dearest lucy,--

“such a sad blow has befallen us. mr. hawkins has died very suddenly.
some may not think it so sad for us, but we had both come to so love him
that it really seems as though we had lost a father. i never knew either
father or mother, so that the dear old man’s death is a real blow to me.
jonathan is greatly distressed. it is not only that he feels sorrow,
deep sorrow, for the dear, good man who has befriended him all his life,
and now at the end has treated him like his own son and left him a
fortune which to people of our modest bringing up is wealth beyond the
dream of avarice, but jonathan feels it on another account. he says the
amount of responsibility which it puts upon him makes him nervous. he
begins to doubt himself. i try to cheer him up, and _my_ belief in _him_
helps him to have a belief in himself. but it is here that the grave
shock that he experienced tells upon him the most. oh, it is too hard
that a sweet, simple, noble, strong nature such as his--a nature which
enabled him by our dear, good friend’s aid to rise from clerk to master
in a few years--should be so injured that the very essence of its
strength is gone. forgive me, dear, if i worry you with my troubles in
the midst of your own happiness; but, lucy dear, i must tell some one,
for the strain of keeping up a brave and cheerful appearance to jonathan
tries me, and i have no one here that i can confide in. i dread coming
up to london, as we must do the day after to-morrow; for poor mr.
hawkins left in his will that he was to be buried in the grave with his
father. as there are no relations at all, jonathan will have to be chief
mourner. i shall try to run over to see you, dearest, if only for a few
minutes. forgive me for troubling you. with all blessings,

“your loving

“mina harker.”


_dr. seward’s diary._

_20 september._--only resolution and habit can let me make an entry
to-night. i am too miserable, too low-spirited, too sick of the world
and all in it, including life itself, that i would not care if i heard
this moment the flapping of the wings of the angel of death. and he has
been flapping those grim wings to some purpose of late--lucy’s mother
and arthur’s father, and now.... let me get on with my work.

i duly relieved van helsing in his watch over lucy. we wanted arthur to
go to rest also, but he refused at first. it was only when i told him
that we should want him to help us during the day, and that we must not
all break down for want of rest, lest lucy should suffer, that he agreed
to go. van helsing was very kind to him. “come, my child,” he said;
“come with me. you are sick and weak, and have had much sorrow and much
mental pain, as well as that tax on your strength that we know of. you
must not be alone; for to be alone is to be full of fears and alarms.
come to the drawing-room, where there is a big fire, and there are two
sofas. you shall lie on one, and i on the other, and our sympathy will
be comfort to each other, even though we do not speak, and even if we
sleep.” arthur went off with him, casting back a longing look on lucy’s
face, which lay in her pillow, almost whiter than the lawn. she lay
quite still, and i looked round the room to see that all was as it
should be. i could see that the professor had carried out in this room,
as in the other, his purpose of using the garlic; the whole of the
window-sashes reeked with it, and round lucy’s neck, over the silk
handkerchief which van helsing made her keep on, was a rough chaplet of
the same odorous flowers. lucy was breathing somewhat stertorously, and
her face was at its worst, for the open mouth showed the pale gums. her
teeth, in the dim, uncertain light, seemed longer and sharper than they
had been in the morning. in particular, by some trick of the light, the
canine teeth looked longer and sharper than the rest. i sat down by her,
and presently she moved uneasily. at the same moment there came a sort
of dull flapping or buffeting at the window. i went over to it softly,
and peeped out by the corner of the blind. there was a full moonlight,
and i could see that the noise was made by a great bat, which wheeled
round--doubtless attracted by the light, although so dim--and every now
and again struck the window with its wings. when i came back to my seat,
i found that lucy had moved slightly, and had torn away the garlic
flowers from her throat. i replaced them as well as i could, and sat
watching her.

presently she woke, and i gave her food, as van helsing had prescribed.
she took but a little, and that languidly. there did not seem to be with
her now the unconscious struggle for life and strength that had hitherto
so marked her illness. it struck me as curious that the moment she
became conscious she pressed the garlic flowers close to her. it was
certainly odd that whenever she got into that lethargic state, with the
stertorous breathing, she put the flowers from her; but that when she
waked she clutched them close. there was no possibility of making any
mistake about this, for in the long hours that followed, she had many
spells of sleeping and waking and repeated both actions many times.

at six o’clock van helsing came to relieve me. arthur had then fallen
into a doze, and he mercifully let him sleep on. when he saw lucy’s face
i could hear the sissing indraw of his breath, and he said to me in a
sharp whisper: “draw up the blind; i want light!” then he bent down,
and, with his face almost touching lucy’s, examined her carefully. he
removed the flowers and lifted the silk handkerchief from her throat. as
he did so he started back, and i could hear his ejaculation, “mein
gott!” as it was smothered in his throat. i bent over and looked, too,
and as i noticed some queer chill came over me.

the wounds on the throat had absolutely disappeared.

for fully five minutes van helsing stood looking at her, with his face
at its sternest. then he turned to me and said calmly:--

“she is dying. it will not be long now. it will be much difference, mark
me, whether she dies conscious or in her sleep. wake that poor boy, and
let him come and see the last; he trusts us, and we have promised him.”

i went to the dining-room and waked him. he was dazed for a moment, but
when he saw the sunlight streaming in through the edges of the shutters
he thought he was late, and expressed his fear. i assured him that lucy
was still asleep, but told him as gently as i could that both van
helsing and i feared that the end was near. he covered his face with his
hands, and slid down on his knees by the sofa, where he remained,
perhaps a minute, with his head buried, praying, whilst his shoulders
shook with grief. i took him by the hand and raised him up. “come,” i
said, “my dear old fellow, summon all your fortitude: it will be best
and easiest for her.”

when we came into lucy’s room i could see that van helsing had, with
his usual forethought, been putting matters straight and making
everything look as pleasing as possible. he had even brushed lucy’s
hair, so that it lay on the pillow in its usual sunny ripples. when we
came into the room she opened her eyes, and seeing him, whispered
softly:--

“arthur! oh, my love, i am so glad you have come!” he was stooping to
kiss her, when van helsing motioned him back. “no,” he whispered, “not
yet! hold her hand; it will comfort her more.”

so arthur took her hand and knelt beside her, and she looked her best,
with all the soft lines matching the angelic beauty of her eyes. then
gradually her eyes closed, and she sank to sleep. for a little bit her
breast heaved softly, and her breath came and went like a tired child’s.

and then insensibly there came the strange change which i had noticed in
the night. her breathing grew stertorous, the mouth opened, and the pale
gums, drawn back, made the teeth look longer and sharper than ever. in a
sort of sleep-waking, vague, unconscious way she opened her eyes, which
were now dull and hard at once, and said in a soft, voluptuous voice,
such as i had never heard from her lips:--

“arthur! oh, my love, i am so glad you have come! kiss me!” arthur bent
eagerly over to kiss her; but at that instant van helsing, who, like me,
had been startled by her voice, swooped upon him, and catching him by
the neck with both hands, dragged him back with a fury of strength which
i never thought he could have possessed, and actually hurled him almost
across the room.

“not for your life!” he said; “not for your living soul and hers!” and
he stood between them like a lion at bay.

arthur was so taken aback that he did not for a moment know what to do
or say; and before any impulse of violence could seize him he realised
the place and the occasion, and stood silent, waiting.

i kept my eyes fixed on lucy, as did van helsing, and we saw a spasm as
of rage flit like a shadow over her face; the sharp teeth champed
together. then her eyes closed, and she breathed heavily.

very shortly after she opened her eyes in all their softness, and
putting out her poor, pale, thin hand, took van helsing’s great brown
one; drawing it to her, she kissed it. “my true friend,” she said, in a
faint voice, but with untellable pathos, “my true friend, and his! oh,
guard him, and give me peace!”

“i swear it!” he said solemnly, kneeling beside her and holding up his
hand, as one who registers an oath. then he turned to arthur, and said
to him: “come, my child, take her hand in yours, and kiss her on the
forehead, and only once.”

their eyes met instead of their lips; and so they parted.

lucy’s eyes closed; and van helsing, who had been watching closely, took
arthur’s arm, and drew him away.

and then lucy’s breathing became stertorous again, and all at once it
ceased.

“it is all over,” said van helsing. “she is dead!”

i took arthur by the arm, and led him away to the drawing-room, where he
sat down, and covered his face with his hands, sobbing in a way that
nearly broke me down to see.

i went back to the room, and found van helsing looking at poor lucy, and
his face was sterner than ever. some change had come over her body.
death had given back part of her beauty, for her brow and cheeks had
recovered some of their flowing lines; even the lips had lost their
deadly pallor. it was as if the blood, no longer needed for the working
of the heart, had gone to make the harshness of death as little rude as
might be.

    “we thought her dying whilst she slept,
        and sleeping when she died.”

i stood beside van helsing, and said:--

“ah, well, poor girl, there is peace for her at last. it is the end!”

he turned to me, and said with grave solemnity:--

“not so; alas! not so. it is only the beginning!”

when i asked him what he meant, he only shook his head and answered:--

“we can do nothing as yet. wait and see.”




chapter xiii

dr. seward’s diary--_continued_.


the funeral was arranged for the next succeeding day, so that lucy and
her mother might be buried together. i attended to all the ghastly
formalities, and the urbane undertaker proved that his staff were
afflicted--or blessed--with something of his own obsequious suavity.
even the woman who performed the last offices for the dead remarked to
me, in a confidential, brother-professional way, when she had come out
from the death-chamber:--

“she makes a very beautiful corpse, sir. it’s quite a privilege to
attend on her. it’s not too much to say that she will do credit to our
establishment!”

i noticed that van helsing never kept far away. this was possible from
the disordered state of things in the household. there were no relatives
at hand; and as arthur had to be back the next day to attend at his
father’s funeral, we were unable to notify any one who should have been
bidden. under the circumstances, van helsing and i took it upon
ourselves to examine papers, etc. he insisted upon looking over lucy’s
papers himself. i asked him why, for i feared that he, being a
foreigner, might not be quite aware of english legal requirements, and
so might in ignorance make some unnecessary trouble. he answered me:--

“i know; i know. you forget that i am a lawyer as well as a doctor. but
this is not altogether for the law. you knew that, when you avoided the
coroner. i have more than him to avoid. there may be papers more--such
as this.”

as he spoke he took from his pocket-book the memorandum which had been
in lucy’s breast, and which she had torn in her sleep.

“when you find anything of the solicitor who is for the late mrs.
westenra, seal all her papers, and write him to-night. for me, i watch
here in the room and in miss lucy’s old room all night, and i myself
search for what may be. it is not well that her very thoughts go into
the hands of strangers.”

i went on with my part of the work, and in another half hour had found
the name and address of mrs. westenra’s solicitor and had written to
him. all the poor lady’s papers were in order; explicit directions
regarding the place of burial were given. i had hardly sealed the
letter, when, to my surprise, van helsing walked into the room,
saying:--

“can i help you, friend john? i am free, and if i may, my service is to
you.”

“have you got what you looked for?” i asked, to which he replied:--

“i did not look for any specific thing. i only hoped to find, and find i
have, all that there was--only some letters and a few memoranda, and a
diary new begun. but i have them here, and we shall for the present say
nothing of them. i shall see that poor lad to-morrow evening, and, with
his sanction, i shall use some.”

when we had finished the work in hand, he said to me:--

“and now, friend john, i think we may to bed. we want sleep, both you
and i, and rest to recuperate. to-morrow we shall have much to do, but
for the to-night there is no need of us. alas!”

before turning in we went to look at poor lucy. the undertaker had
certainly done his work well, for the room was turned into a small
_chapelle ardente_. there was a wilderness of beautiful white flowers,
and death was made as little repulsive as might be. the end of the
winding-sheet was laid over the face; when the professor bent over and
turned it gently back, we both started at the beauty before us, the tall
wax candles showing a sufficient light to note it well. all lucy’s
loveliness had come back to her in death, and the hours that had passed,
instead of leaving traces of “decay’s effacing fingers,” had but
restored the beauty of life, till positively i could not believe my eyes
that i was looking at a corpse.

the professor looked sternly grave. he had not loved her as i had, and
there was no need for tears in his eyes. he said to me: “remain till i
return,” and left the room. he came back with a handful of wild garlic
from the box waiting in the hall, but which had not been opened, and
placed the flowers amongst the others on and around the bed. then he
took from his neck, inside his collar, a little gold crucifix, and
placed it over the mouth. he restored the sheet to its place, and we
came away.

i was undressing in my own room, when, with a premonitory tap at the
door, he entered, and at once began to speak:--

“to-morrow i want you to bring me, before night, a set of post-mortem
knives.”

“must we make an autopsy?” i asked.

“yes and no. i want to operate, but not as you think. let me tell you
now, but not a word to another. i want to cut off her head and take out
her heart. ah! you a surgeon, and so shocked! you, whom i have seen with
no tremble of hand or heart, do operations of life and death that make
the rest shudder. oh, but i must not forget, my dear friend john, that
you loved her; and i have not forgotten it, for it is i that shall
operate, and you must only help. i would like to do it to-night, but for
arthur i must not; he will be free after his father’s funeral to-morrow,
and he will want to see her--to see _it_. then, when she is coffined
ready for the next day, you and i shall come when all sleep. we shall
unscrew the coffin-lid, and shall do our operation: and then replace
all, so that none know, save we alone.”

“but why do it at all? the girl is dead. why mutilate her poor body
without need? and if there is no necessity for a post-mortem and nothing
to gain by it--no good to her, to us, to science, to human
knowledge--why do it? without such it is monstrous.”

for answer he put his hand on my shoulder, and said, with infinite
tenderness:--

“friend john, i pity your poor bleeding heart; and i love you the more
because it does so bleed. if i could, i would take on myself the burden
that you do bear. but there are things that you know not, but that you
shall know, and bless me for knowing, though they are not pleasant
things. john, my child, you have been my friend now many years, and yet
did you ever know me to do any without good cause? i may err--i am but
man; but i believe in all i do. was it not for these causes that you
send for me when the great trouble came? yes! were you not amazed, nay
horrified, when i would not let arthur kiss his love--though she was
dying--and snatched him away by all my strength? yes! and yet you saw
how she thanked me, with her so beautiful dying eyes, her voice, too, so
weak, and she kiss my rough old hand and bless me? yes! and did you not
hear me swear promise to her, that so she closed her eyes grateful? yes!

“well, i have good reason now for all i want to do. you have for many
years trust me; you have believe me weeks past, when there be things so
strange that you might have well doubt. believe me yet a little, friend
john. if you trust me not, then i must tell what i think; and that is
not perhaps well. and if i work--as work i shall, no matter trust or no
trust--without my friend trust in me, i work with heavy heart and feel,
oh! so lonely when i want all help and courage that may be!” he paused a
moment and went on solemnly: “friend john, there are strange and
terrible days before us. let us not be two, but one, that so we work to
a good end. will you not have faith in me?”

i took his hand, and promised him. i held my door open as he went away,
and watched him go into his room and close the door. as i stood without
moving, i saw one of the maids pass silently along the passage--she had
her back towards me, so did not see me--and go into the room where lucy
lay. the sight touched me. devotion is so rare, and we are so grateful
to those who show it unasked to those we love. here was a poor girl
putting aside the terrors which she naturally had of death to go watch
alone by the bier of the mistress whom she loved, so that the poor clay
might not be lonely till laid to eternal rest....

       *       *       *       *       *

i must have slept long and soundly, for it was broad daylight when van
helsing waked me by coming into my room. he came over to my bedside and
said:--

“you need not trouble about the knives; we shall not do it.”

“why not?” i asked. for his solemnity of the night before had greatly
impressed me.

“because,” he said sternly, “it is too late--or too early. see!” here he
held up the little golden crucifix. “this was stolen in the night.”

“how, stolen,” i asked in wonder, “since you have it now?”

“because i get it back from the worthless wretch who stole it, from the
woman who robbed the dead and the living. her punishment will surely
come, but not through me; she knew not altogether what she did and thus
unknowing, she only stole. now we must wait.”

he went away on the word, leaving me with a new mystery to think of, a
new puzzle to grapple with.

the forenoon was a dreary time, but at noon the solicitor came: mr.
marquand, of wholeman, sons, marquand & lidderdale. he was very genial
and very appreciative of what we had done, and took off our hands all
cares as to details. during lunch he told us that mrs. westenra had for
some time expected sudden death from her heart, and had put her affairs
in absolute order; he informed us that, with the exception of a certain
entailed property of lucy’s father’s which now, in default of direct
issue, went back to a distant branch of the family, the whole estate,
real and personal, was left absolutely to arthur holmwood. when he had
told us so much he went on:--

“frankly we did our best to prevent such a testamentary disposition, and
pointed out certain contingencies that might leave her daughter either
penniless or not so free as she should be to act regarding a matrimonial
alliance. indeed, we pressed the matter so far that we almost came into
collision, for she asked us if we were or were not prepared to carry out
her wishes. of course, we had then no alternative but to accept. we were
right in principle, and ninety-nine times out of a hundred we should
have proved, by the logic of events, the accuracy of our judgment.
frankly, however, i must admit that in this case any other form of
disposition would have rendered impossible the carrying out of her
wishes. for by her predeceasing her daughter the latter would have come
into possession of the property, and, even had she only survived her
mother by five minutes, her property would, in case there were no
will--and a will was a practical impossibility in such a case--have been
treated at her decease as under intestacy. in which case lord godalming,
though so dear a friend, would have had no claim in the world; and the
inheritors, being remote, would not be likely to abandon their just
rights, for sentimental reasons regarding an entire stranger. i assure
you, my dear sirs, i am rejoiced at the result, perfectly rejoiced.”

he was a good fellow, but his rejoicing at the one little part--in which
he was officially interested--of so great a tragedy, was an
object-lesson in the limitations of sympathetic understanding.

he did not remain long, but said he would look in later in the day and
see lord godalming. his coming, however, had been a certain comfort to
us, since it assured us that we should not have to dread hostile
criticism as to any of our acts. arthur was expected at five o’clock, so
a little before that time we visited the death-chamber. it was so in
very truth, for now both mother and daughter lay in it. the undertaker,
true to his craft, had made the best display he could of his goods, and
there was a mortuary air about the place that lowered our spirits at
once. van helsing ordered the former arrangement to be adhered to,
explaining that, as lord godalming was coming very soon, it would be
less harrowing to his feelings to see all that was left of his _fiancée_
quite alone. the undertaker seemed shocked at his own stupidity and
exerted himself to restore things to the condition in which we left them
the night before, so that when arthur came such shocks to his feelings
as we could avoid were saved.

poor fellow! he looked desperately sad and broken; even his stalwart
manhood seemed to have shrunk somewhat under the strain of his
much-tried emotions. he had, i knew, been very genuinely and devotedly
attached to his father; and to lose him, and at such a time, was a
bitter blow to him. with me he was warm as ever, and to van helsing he
was sweetly courteous; but i could not help seeing that there was some
constraint with him. the professor noticed it, too, and motioned me to
bring him upstairs. i did so, and left him at the door of the room, as i
felt he would like to be quite alone with her, but he took my arm and
led me in, saying huskily:--

“you loved her too, old fellow; she told me all about it, and there was
no friend had a closer place in her heart than you. i don’t know how to
thank you for all you have done for her. i can’t think yet....”

here he suddenly broke down, and threw his arms round my shoulders and
laid his head on my breast, crying:--

“oh, jack! jack! what shall i do! the whole of life seems gone from me
all at once, and there is nothing in the wide world for me to live for.”

i comforted him as well as i could. in such cases men do not need much
expression. a grip of the hand, the tightening of an arm over the
shoulder, a sob in unison, are expressions of sympathy dear to a man’s
heart. i stood still and silent till his sobs died away, and then i said
softly to him:--

“come and look at her.”

together we moved over to the bed, and i lifted the lawn from her face.
god! how beautiful she was. every hour seemed to be enhancing her
loveliness. it frightened and amazed me somewhat; and as for arthur, he
fell a-trembling, and finally was shaken with doubt as with an ague. at
last, after a long pause, he said to me in a faint whisper:--

“jack, is she really dead?”

i assured him sadly that it was so, and went on to suggest--for i felt
that such a horrible doubt should not have life for a moment longer than
i could help--that it often happened that after death faces became
softened and even resolved into their youthful beauty; that this was
especially so when death had been preceded by any acute or prolonged
suffering. it seemed to quite do away with any doubt, and, after
kneeling beside the couch for a while and looking at her lovingly and
long, he turned aside. i told him that that must be good-bye, as the
coffin had to be prepared; so he went back and took her dead hand in his
and kissed it, and bent over and kissed her forehead. he came away,
fondly looking back over his shoulder at her as he came.

i left him in the drawing-room, and told van helsing that he had said
good-bye; so the latter went to the kitchen to tell the undertaker’s men
to proceed with the preparations and to screw up the coffin. when he
came out of the room again i told him of arthur’s question, and he
replied:--

“i am not surprised. just now i doubted for a moment myself!”

we all dined together, and i could see that poor art was trying to make
the best of things. van helsing had been silent all dinner-time; but
when we had lit our cigars he said--

“lord----”; but arthur interrupted him:--

“no, no, not that, for god’s sake! not yet at any rate. forgive me, sir:
i did not mean to speak offensively; it is only because my loss is so
recent.”

the professor answered very sweetly:--

“i only used that name because i was in doubt. i must not call you
‘mr.,’ and i have grown to love you--yes, my dear boy, to love you--as
arthur.”

arthur held out his hand, and took the old man’s warmly.

“call me what you will,” he said. “i hope i may always have the title of
a friend. and let me say that i am at a loss for words to thank you for
your goodness to my poor dear.” he paused a moment, and went on: “i know
that she understood your goodness even better than i do; and if i was
rude or in any way wanting at that time you acted so--you remember”--the
professor nodded--“you must forgive me.”

he answered with a grave kindness:--

“i know it was hard for you to quite trust me then, for to trust such
violence needs to understand; and i take it that you do not--that you
cannot--trust me now, for you do not yet understand. and there may be
more times when i shall want you to trust when you cannot--and may
not--and must not yet understand. but the time will come when your trust
shall be whole and complete in me, and when you shall understand as
though the sunlight himself shone through. then you shall bless me from
first to last for your own sake, and for the sake of others and for her
dear sake to whom i swore to protect.”

“and, indeed, indeed, sir,” said arthur warmly, “i shall in all ways
trust you. i know and believe you have a very noble heart, and you are
jack’s friend, and you were hers. you shall do what you like.”

the professor cleared his throat a couple of times, as though about to
speak, and finally said:--

“may i ask you something now?”

“certainly.”

“you know that mrs. westenra left you all her property?”

“no, poor dear; i never thought of it.”

“and as it is all yours, you have a right to deal with it as you will. i
want you to give me permission to read all miss lucy’s papers and
letters. believe me, it is no idle curiosity. i have a motive of which,
be sure, she would have approved. i have them all here. i took them
before we knew that all was yours, so that no strange hand might touch
them--no strange eye look through words into her soul. i shall keep
them, if i may; even you may not see them yet, but i shall keep them
safe. no word shall be lost; and in the good time i shall give them back
to you. it’s a hard thing i ask, but you will do it, will you not, for
lucy’s sake?”

arthur spoke out heartily, like his old self:--

“dr. van helsing, you may do what you will. i feel that in saying this i
am doing what my dear one would have approved. i shall not trouble you
with questions till the time comes.”

the old professor stood up as he said solemnly:--

“and you are right. there will be pain for us all; but it will not be
all pain, nor will this pain be the last. we and you too--you most of
all, my dear boy--will have to pass through the bitter water before we
reach the sweet. but we must be brave of heart and unselfish, and do our
duty, and all will be well!”

i slept on a sofa in arthur’s room that night. van helsing did not go to
bed at all. he went to and fro, as if patrolling the house, and was
never out of sight of the room where lucy lay in her coffin, strewn with
the wild garlic flowers, which sent, through the odour of lily and rose,
a heavy, overpowering smell into the night.


_mina harker’s journal._

_22 september._--in the train to exeter. jonathan sleeping.

it seems only yesterday that the last entry was made, and yet how much
between then, in whitby and all the world before me, jonathan away and
no news of him; and now, married to jonathan, jonathan a solicitor, a
partner, rich, master of his business, mr. hawkins dead and buried, and
jonathan with another attack that may harm him. some day he may ask me
about it. down it all goes. i am rusty in my shorthand--see what
unexpected prosperity does for us--so it may be as well to freshen it up
again with an exercise anyhow....

the service was very simple and very solemn. there were only ourselves
and the servants there, one or two old friends of his from exeter, his
london agent, and a gentleman representing sir john paxton, the
president of the incorporated law society. jonathan and i stood hand in
hand, and we felt that our best and dearest friend was gone from us....

we came back to town quietly, taking a ’bus to hyde park corner.
jonathan thought it would interest me to go into the row for a while, so
we sat down; but there were very few people there, and it was
sad-looking and desolate to see so many empty chairs. it made us think
of the empty chair at home; so we got up and walked down piccadilly.
jonathan was holding me by the arm, the way he used to in old days
before i went to school. i felt it very improper, for you can’t go on
for some years teaching etiquette and decorum to other girls without the
pedantry of it biting into yourself a bit; but it was jonathan, and he
was my husband, and we didn’t know anybody who saw us--and we didn’t
care if they did--so on we walked. i was looking at a very beautiful
girl, in a big cart-wheel hat, sitting in a victoria outside guiliano’s,
when i felt jonathan clutch my arm so tight that he hurt me, and he said
under his breath: “my god!” i am always anxious about jonathan, for i
fear that some nervous fit may upset him again; so i turned to him
quickly, and asked him what it was that disturbed him.

he was very pale, and his eyes seemed bulging out as, half in terror and
half in amazement, he gazed at a tall, thin man, with a beaky nose and
black moustache and pointed beard, who was also observing the pretty
girl. he was looking at her so hard that he did not see either of us,
and so i had a good view of him. his face was not a good face; it was
hard, and cruel, and sensual, and his big white teeth, that looked all
the whiter because his lips were so red, were pointed like an animal’s.
jonathan kept staring at him, till i was afraid he would notice. i
feared he might take it ill, he looked so fierce and nasty. i asked
jonathan why he was disturbed, and he answered, evidently thinking that
i knew as much about it as he did: “do you see who it is?”

“no, dear,” i said; “i don’t know him; who is it?” his answer seemed to
shock and thrill me, for it was said as if he did not know that it was
to me, mina, to whom he was speaking:--

“it is the man himself!”

the poor dear was evidently terrified at something--very greatly
terrified; i do believe that if he had not had me to lean on and to
support him he would have sunk down. he kept staring; a man came out of
the shop with a small parcel, and gave it to the lady, who then drove
off. the dark man kept his eyes fixed on her, and when the carriage
moved up piccadilly he followed in the same direction, and hailed a
hansom. jonathan kept looking after him, and said, as if to himself:--

“i believe it is the count, but he has grown young. my god, if this be
so! oh, my god! my god! if i only knew! if i only knew!” he was
distressing himself so much that i feared to keep his mind on the
subject by asking him any questions, so i remained silent. i drew him
away quietly, and he, holding my arm, came easily. we walked a little
further, and then went in and sat for a while in the green park. it was
a hot day for autumn, and there was a comfortable seat in a shady place.
after a few minutes’ staring at nothing, jonathan’s eyes closed, and he
went quietly into a sleep, with his head on my shoulder. i thought it
was the best thing for him, so did not disturb him. in about twenty
minutes he woke up, and said to me quite cheerfully:--

“why, mina, have i been asleep! oh, do forgive me for being so rude.
come, and we’ll have a cup of tea somewhere.” he had evidently forgotten
all about the dark stranger, as in his illness he had forgotten all that
this episode had reminded him of. i don’t like this lapsing into
forgetfulness; it may make or continue some injury to the brain. i must
not ask him, for fear i shall do more harm than good; but i must somehow
learn the facts of his journey abroad. the time is come, i fear, when i
must open that parcel, and know what is written. oh, jonathan, you will,
i know, forgive me if i do wrong, but it is for your own dear sake.

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--a sad home-coming in every way--the house empty of the dear
soul who was so good to us; jonathan still pale and dizzy under a slight
relapse of his malady; and now a telegram from van helsing, whoever he
may be:--

“you will be grieved to hear that mrs. westenra died five days ago, and
that lucy died the day before yesterday. they were both buried to-day.”

oh, what a wealth of sorrow in a few words! poor mrs. westenra! poor
lucy! gone, gone, never to return to us! and poor, poor arthur, to have
lost such sweetness out of his life! god help us all to bear our
troubles.


_dr. seward’s diary._

_22 september._--it is all over. arthur has gone back to ring, and has
taken quincey morris with him. what a fine fellow is quincey! i believe
in my heart of hearts that he suffered as much about lucy’s death as any
of us; but he bore himself through it like a moral viking. if america
can go on breeding men like that, she will be a power in the world
indeed. van helsing is lying down, having a rest preparatory to his
journey. he goes over to amsterdam to-night, but says he returns
to-morrow night; that he only wants to make some arrangements which can
only be made personally. he is to stop with me then, if he can; he says
he has work to do in london which may take him some time. poor old
fellow! i fear that the strain of the past week has broken down even his
iron strength. all the time of the burial he was, i could see, putting
some terrible restraint on himself. when it was all over, we were
standing beside arthur, who, poor fellow, was speaking of his part in
the operation where his blood had been transfused to his lucy’s veins; i
could see van helsing’s face grow white and purple by turns. arthur was
saying that he felt since then as if they two had been really married
and that she was his wife in the sight of god. none of us said a word of
the other operations, and none of us ever shall. arthur and quincey went
away together to the station, and van helsing and i came on here. the
moment we were alone in the carriage he gave way to a regular fit of
hysterics. he has denied to me since that it was hysterics, and insisted
that it was only his sense of humour asserting itself under very
terrible conditions. he laughed till he cried, and i had to draw down
the blinds lest any one should see us and misjudge; and then he cried,
till he laughed again; and laughed and cried together, just as a woman
does. i tried to be stern with him, as one is to a woman under the
circumstances; but it had no effect. men and women are so different in
manifestations of nervous strength or weakness! then when his face grew
grave and stern again i asked him why his mirth, and why at such a time.
his reply was in a way characteristic of him, for it was logical and
forceful and mysterious. he said:--

“ah, you don’t comprehend, friend john. do not think that i am not sad,
though i laugh. see, i have cried even when the laugh did choke me. but
no more think that i am all sorry when i cry, for the laugh he come
just the same. keep it always with you that laughter who knock at your
door and say, ‘may i come in?’ is not the true laughter. no! he is a
king, and he come when and how he like. he ask no person; he choose no
time of suitability. he say, ‘i am here.’ behold, in example i grieve my
heart out for that so sweet young girl; i give my blood for her, though
i am old and worn; i give my time, my skill, my sleep; i let my other
sufferers want that so she may have all. and yet i can laugh at her very
grave--laugh when the clay from the spade of the sexton drop upon her
coffin and say ‘thud! thud!’ to my heart, till it send back the blood
from my cheek. my heart bleed for that poor boy--that dear boy, so of
the age of mine own boy had i been so blessed that he live, and with his
hair and eyes the same. there, you know now why i love him so. and yet
when he say things that touch my husband-heart to the quick, and make my
father-heart yearn to him as to no other man--not even to you, friend
john, for we are more level in experiences than father and son--yet even
at such moment king laugh he come to me and shout and bellow in my ear,
‘here i am! here i am!’ till the blood come dance back and bring some of
the sunshine that he carry with him to my cheek. oh, friend john, it is
a strange world, a sad world, a world full of miseries, and woes, and
troubles; and yet when king laugh come he make them all dance to the
tune he play. bleeding hearts, and dry bones of the churchyard, and
tears that burn as they fall--all dance together to the music that he
make with that smileless mouth of him. and believe me, friend john, that
he is good to come, and kind. ah, we men and women are like ropes drawn
tight with strain that pull us different ways. then tears come; and,
like the rain on the ropes, they brace us up, until perhaps the strain
become too great, and we break. but king laugh he come like the
sunshine, and he ease off the strain again; and we bear to go on with
our labour, what it may be.”

i did not like to wound him by pretending not to see his idea; but, as i
did not yet understand the cause of his laughter, i asked him. as he
answered me his face grew stern, and he said in quite a different
tone:--

“oh, it was the grim irony of it all--this so lovely lady garlanded with
flowers, that looked so fair as life, till one by one we wondered if she
were truly dead; she laid in that so fine marble house in that lonely
churchyard, where rest so many of her kin, laid there with the mother
who loved her, and whom she loved; and that sacred bell going ‘toll!
toll! toll!’ so sad and slow; and those holy men, with the white
garments of the angel, pretending to read books, and yet all the time
their eyes never on the page; and all of us with the bowed head. and all
for what? she is dead; so! is it not?”

“well, for the life of me, professor,” i said, “i can’t see anything to
laugh at in all that. why, your explanation makes it a harder puzzle
than before. but even if the burial service was comic, what about poor
art and his trouble? why, his heart was simply breaking.”

“just so. said he not that the transfusion of his blood to her veins had
made her truly his bride?”

“yes, and it was a sweet and comforting idea for him.”

“quite so. but there was a difficulty, friend john. if so that, then
what about the others? ho, ho! then this so sweet maid is a polyandrist,
and me, with my poor wife dead to me, but alive by church’s law, though
no wits, all gone--even i, who am faithful husband to this now-no-wife,
am bigamist.”

“i don’t see where the joke comes in there either!” i said; and i did
not feel particularly pleased with him for saying such things. he laid
his hand on my arm, and said:--

“friend john, forgive me if i pain. i showed not my feeling to others
when it would wound, but only to you, my old friend, whom i can trust.
if you could have looked into my very heart then when i want to laugh;
if you could have done so when the laugh arrived; if you could do so
now, when king laugh have pack up his crown, and all that is to him--for
he go far, far away from me, and for a long, long time--maybe you would
perhaps pity me the most of all.”

i was touched by the tenderness of his tone, and asked why.

“because i know!”

and now we are all scattered; and for many a long day loneliness will
sit over our roofs with brooding wings. lucy lies in the tomb of her
kin, a lordly death-house in a lonely churchyard, away from teeming
london; where the air is fresh, and the sun rises over hampstead hill,
and where wild flowers grow of their own accord.

so i can finish this diary; and god only knows if i shall ever begin
another. if i do, or if i even open this again, it will be to deal with
different people and different themes; for here at the end, where the
romance of my life is told, ere i go back to take up the thread of my
life-work, i say sadly and without hope,

                        “finis.”


_“the westminster gazette,” 25 september._

                          a hampstead mystery.


the neighbourhood of hampstead is just at present exercised with a
series of events which seem to run on lines parallel to those of what
was known to the writers of headlines as “the kensington horror,” or
“the stabbing woman,” or “the woman in black.” during the past two or
three days several cases have occurred of young children straying from
home or neglecting to return from their playing on the heath. in all
these cases the children were too young to give any properly
intelligible account of themselves, but the consensus of their excuses
is that they had been with a “bloofer lady.” it has always been late in
the evening when they have been missed, and on two occasions the
children have not been found until early in the following morning. it is
generally supposed in the neighbourhood that, as the first child missed
gave as his reason for being away that a “bloofer lady” had asked him to
come for a walk, the others had picked up the phrase and used it as
occasion served. this is the more natural as the favourite game of the
little ones at present is luring each other away by wiles. a
correspondent writes us that to see some of the tiny tots pretending to
be the “bloofer lady” is supremely funny. some of our caricaturists
might, he says, take a lesson in the irony of grotesque by comparing the
reality and the picture. it is only in accordance with general
principles of human nature that the “bloofer lady” should be the popular
rôle at these _al fresco_ performances. our correspondent naïvely says
that even ellen terry could not be so winningly attractive as some of
these grubby-faced little children pretend--and even imagine
themselves--to be.

there is, however, possibly a serious side to the question, for some of
the children, indeed all who have been missed at night, have been
slightly torn or wounded in the throat. the wounds seem such as might be
made by a rat or a small dog, and although of not much importance
individually, would tend to show that whatever animal inflicts them has
a system or method of its own. the police of the division have been
instructed to keep a sharp look-out for straying children, especially
when very young, in and around hampstead heath, and for any stray dog
which may be about.


               _“the westminster gazette,” 25 september._

                            _extra special._

                         the hampstead horror.

                         another child injured.

                         _the “bloofer lady.”_

we have just received intelligence that another child, missed last
night, was only discovered late in the morning under a furze bush at the
shooter’s hill side of hampstead heath, which is, perhaps, less
frequented than the other parts. it has the same tiny wound in the
throat as has been noticed in other cases. it was terribly weak, and
looked quite emaciated. it too, when partially restored, had the common
story to tell of being lured away by the “bloofer lady.”




chapter xiv

mina harker’s journal


_23 september_.--jonathan is better after a bad night. i am so glad that
he has plenty of work to do, for that keeps his mind off the terrible
things; and oh, i am rejoiced that he is not now weighed down with the
responsibility of his new position. i knew he would be true to himself,
and now how proud i am to see my jonathan rising to the height of his
advancement and keeping pace in all ways with the duties that come upon
him. he will be away all day till late, for he said he could not lunch
at home. my household work is done, so i shall take his foreign journal,
and lock myself up in my room and read it....


_24 september_.--i hadn’t the heart to write last night; that terrible
record of jonathan’s upset me so. poor dear! how he must have suffered,
whether it be true or only imagination. i wonder if there is any truth
in it at all. did he get his brain fever, and then write all those
terrible things, or had he some cause for it all? i suppose i shall
never know, for i dare not open the subject to him.... and yet that man
we saw yesterday! he seemed quite certain of him.... poor fellow! i
suppose it was the funeral upset him and sent his mind back on some
train of thought.... he believes it all himself. i remember how on our
wedding-day he said: “unless some solemn duty come upon me to go back to
the bitter hours, asleep or awake, mad or sane.” there seems to be
through it all some thread of continuity.... that fearful count was
coming to london.... if it should be, and he came to london, with his
teeming millions.... there may be a solemn duty; and if it come we must
not shrink from it.... i shall be prepared. i shall get my typewriter
this very hour and begin transcribing. then we shall be ready for other
eyes if required. and if it be wanted; then, perhaps, if i am ready,
poor jonathan may not be upset, for i can speak for him and never let
him be troubled or worried with it at all. if ever jonathan quite gets
over the nervousness he may want to tell me of it all, and i can ask him
questions and find out things, and see how i may comfort him.


_letter, van helsing to mrs. harker._

“_24 september._

(_confidence_)

“dear madam,--

“i pray you to pardon my writing, in that i am so far friend as that i
sent to you sad news of miss lucy westenra’s death. by the kindness of
lord godalming, i am empowered to read her letters and papers, for i am
deeply concerned about certain matters vitally important. in them i find
some letters from you, which show how great friends you were and how you
love her. oh, madam mina, by that love, i implore you, help me. it is
for others’ good that i ask--to redress great wrong, and to lift much
and terrible troubles--that may be more great than you can know. may it
be that i see you? you can trust me. i am friend of dr. john seward and
of lord godalming (that was arthur of miss lucy). i must keep it private
for the present from all. i should come to exeter to see you at once if
you tell me i am privilege to come, and where and when. i implore your
pardon, madam. i have read your letters to poor lucy, and know how good
you are and how your husband suffer; so i pray you, if it may be,
enlighten him not, lest it may harm. again your pardon, and forgive me.

“van helsing.”


_telegram, mrs. harker to van helsing._

“_25 september._--come to-day by quarter-past ten train if you can catch
it. can see you any time you call.

“wilhelmina harker.”

mina harker’s journal.

_25 september._--i cannot help feeling terribly excited as the time
draws near for the visit of dr. van helsing, for somehow i expect that
it will throw some light upon jonathan’s sad experience; and as he
attended poor dear lucy in her last illness, he can tell me all about
her. that is the reason of his coming; it is concerning lucy and her
sleep-walking, and not about jonathan. then i shall never know the real
truth now! how silly i am. that awful journal gets hold of my
imagination and tinges everything with something of its own colour. of
course it is about lucy. that habit came back to the poor dear, and that
awful night on the cliff must have made her ill. i had almost forgotten
in my own affairs how ill she was afterwards. she must have told him
of her sleep-walking adventure on the cliff, and that i knew all about
it; and now he wants me to tell him what she knows, so that he may
understand. i hope i did right in not saying anything of it to mrs.
westenra; i should never forgive myself if any act of mine, were it even
a negative one, brought harm on poor dear lucy. i hope, too, dr. van
helsing will not blame me; i have had so much trouble and anxiety of
late that i feel i cannot bear more just at present.

i suppose a cry does us all good at times--clears the air as other rain
does. perhaps it was reading the journal yesterday that upset me, and
then jonathan went away this morning to stay away from me a whole day
and night, the first time we have been parted since our marriage. i do
hope the dear fellow will take care of himself, and that nothing will
occur to upset him. it is two o’clock, and the doctor will be here soon
now. i shall say nothing of jonathan’s journal unless he asks me. i am
so glad i have type-written out my own journal, so that, in case he asks
about lucy, i can hand it to him; it will save much questioning.

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--he has come and gone. oh, what a strange meeting, and how it
all makes my head whirl round! i feel like one in a dream. can it be all
possible, or even a part of it? if i had not read jonathan’s journal
first, i should never have accepted even a possibility. poor, poor, dear
jonathan! how he must have suffered. please the good god, all this may
not upset him again. i shall try to save him from it; but it may be even
a consolation and a help to him--terrible though it be and awful in its
consequences--to know for certain that his eyes and ears and brain did
not deceive him, and that it is all true. it may be that it is the doubt
which haunts him; that when the doubt is removed, no matter
which--waking or dreaming--may prove the truth, he will be more
satisfied and better able to bear the shock. dr. van helsing must be a
good man as well as a clever one if he is arthur’s friend and dr.
seward’s, and if they brought him all the way from holland to look after
lucy. i feel from having seen him that he _is_ good and kind and of a
noble nature. when he comes to-morrow i shall ask him about jonathan;
and then, please god, all this sorrow and anxiety may lead to a good
end. i used to think i would like to practise interviewing; jonathan’s
friend on “the exeter news” told him that memory was everything in such
work--that you must be able to put down exactly almost every word
spoken, even if you had to refine some of it afterwards. here was a rare
interview; i shall try to record it _verbatim_.

it was half-past two o’clock when the knock came. i took my courage _à
deux mains_ and waited. in a few minutes mary opened the door, and
announced “dr. van helsing.”

i rose and bowed, and he came towards me; a man of medium weight,
strongly built, with his shoulders set back over a broad, deep chest and
a neck well balanced on the trunk as the head is on the neck. the poise
of the head strikes one at once as indicative of thought and power; the
head is noble, well-sized, broad, and large behind the ears. the face,
clean-shaven, shows a hard, square chin, a large, resolute, mobile
mouth, a good-sized nose, rather straight, but with quick, sensitive
nostrils, that seem to broaden as the big, bushy brows come down and the
mouth tightens. the forehead is broad and fine, rising at first almost
straight and then sloping back above two bumps or ridges wide apart;
such a forehead that the reddish hair cannot possibly tumble over it,
but falls naturally back and to the sides. big, dark blue eyes are set
widely apart, and are quick and tender or stern with the man’s moods. he
said to me:--

“mrs. harker, is it not?” i bowed assent.

“that was miss mina murray?” again i assented.

“it is mina murray that i came to see that was friend of that poor dear
child lucy westenra. madam mina, it is on account of the dead i come.”

“sir,” i said, “you could have no better claim on me than that you were
a friend and helper of lucy westenra.” and i held out my hand. he took
it and said tenderly:--

“oh, madam mina, i knew that the friend of that poor lily girl must be
good, but i had yet to learn----” he finished his speech with a courtly
bow. i asked him what it was that he wanted to see me about, so he at
once began:--

“i have read your letters to miss lucy. forgive me, but i had to begin
to inquire somewhere, and there was none to ask. i know that you were
with her at whitby. she sometimes kept a diary--you need not look
surprised, madam mina; it was begun after you had left, and was in
imitation of you--and in that diary she traces by inference certain
things to a sleep-walking in which she puts down that you saved her. in
great perplexity then i come to you, and ask you out of your so much
kindness to tell me all of it that you can remember.”

“i can tell you, i think, dr. van helsing, all about it.”

“ah, then you have good memory for facts, for details? it is not always
so with young ladies.”

“no, doctor, but i wrote it all down at the time. i can show it to you
if you like.”

“oh, madam mina, i will be grateful; you will do me much favour.” i
could not resist the temptation of mystifying him a bit--i suppose it is
some of the taste of the original apple that remains still in our
mouths--so i handed him the shorthand diary. he took it with a grateful
bow, and said:--

“may i read it?”

“if you wish,” i answered as demurely as i could. he opened it, and for
an instant his face fell. then he stood up and bowed.

“oh, you so clever woman!” he said. “i knew long that mr. jonathan was a
man of much thankfulness; but see, his wife have all the good things.
and will you not so much honour me and so help me as to read it for me?
alas! i know not the shorthand.” by this time my little joke was over,
and i was almost ashamed; so i took the typewritten copy from my
workbasket and handed it to him.

“forgive me,” i said: “i could not help it; but i had been thinking that
it was of dear lucy that you wished to ask, and so that you might not
have time to wait--not on my account, but because i know your time must
be precious--i have written it out on the typewriter for you.”

he took it and his eyes glistened. “you are so good,” he said. “and may
i read it now? i may want to ask you some things when i have read.”

“by all means,” i said, “read it over whilst i order lunch; and then you
can ask me questions whilst we eat.” he bowed and settled himself in a
chair with his back to the light, and became absorbed in the papers,
whilst i went to see after lunch chiefly in order that he might not be
disturbed. when i came back, i found him walking hurriedly up and down
the room, his face all ablaze with excitement. he rushed up to me and
took me by both hands.

“oh, madam mina,” he said, “how can i say what i owe to you? this paper
is as sunshine. it opens the gate to me. i am daze, i am dazzle, with so
much light, and yet clouds roll in behind the light every time. but that
you do not, cannot, comprehend. oh, but i am grateful to you, you so
clever woman. madam”--he said this very solemnly--“if ever abraham van
helsing can do anything for you or yours, i trust you will let me know.
it will be pleasure and delight if i may serve you as a friend; as a
friend, but all i have ever learned, all i can ever do, shall be for you
and those you love. there are darknesses in life, and there are lights;
you are one of the lights. you will have happy life and good life, and
your husband will be blessed in you.”

“but, doctor, you praise me too much, and--and you do not know me.”

“not know you--i, who am old, and who have studied all my life men and
women; i, who have made my specialty the brain and all that belongs to
him and all that follow from him! and i have read your diary that you
have so goodly written for me, and which breathes out truth in every
line. i, who have read your so sweet letter to poor lucy of your
marriage and your trust, not know you! oh, madam mina, good women tell
all their lives, and by day and by hour and by minute, such things that
angels can read; and we men who wish to know have in us something of
angels’ eyes. your husband is noble nature, and you are noble too, for
you trust, and trust cannot be where there is mean nature. and your
husband--tell me of him. is he quite well? is all that fever gone, and
is he strong and hearty?” i saw here an opening to ask him about
jonathan, so i said:--

“he was almost recovered, but he has been greatly upset by mr. hawkins’s
death.” he interrupted:--

“oh, yes, i know, i know. i have read your last two letters.” i went
on:--

“i suppose this upset him, for when we were in town on thursday last he
had a sort of shock.”

“a shock, and after brain fever so soon! that was not good. what kind of
a shock was it?”

“he thought he saw some one who recalled something terrible, something
which led to his brain fever.” and here the whole thing seemed to
overwhelm me in a rush. the pity for jonathan, the horror which he
experienced, the whole fearful mystery of his diary, and the fear that
has been brooding over me ever since, all came in a tumult. i suppose i
was hysterical, for i threw myself on my knees and held up my hands to
him, and implored him to make my husband well again. he took my hands
and raised me up, and made me sit on the sofa, and sat by me; he held my
hand in his, and said to me with, oh, such infinite sweetness:--

“my life is a barren and lonely one, and so full of work that i have not
had much time for friendships; but since i have been summoned to here by
my friend john seward i have known so many good people and seen such
nobility that i feel more than ever--and it has grown with my advancing
years--the loneliness of my life. believe, me, then, that i come here
full of respect for you, and you have given me hope--hope, not in what i
am seeking of, but that there are good women still left to make life
happy--good women, whose lives and whose truths may make good lesson for
the children that are to be. i am glad, glad, that i may here be of some
use to you; for if your husband suffer, he suffer within the range of my
study and experience. i promise you that i will gladly do _all_ for him
that i can--all to make his life strong and manly, and your life a happy
one. now you must eat. you are overwrought and perhaps over-anxious.
husband jonathan would not like to see you so pale; and what he like not
where he love, is not to his good. therefore for his sake you must eat
and smile. you have told me all about lucy, and so now we shall not
speak of it, lest it distress. i shall stay in exeter to-night, for i
want to think much over what you have told me, and when i have thought i
will ask you questions, if i may. and then, too, you will tell me of
husband jonathan’s trouble so far as you can, but not yet. you must eat
now; afterwards you shall tell me all.”

after lunch, when we went back to the drawing-room, he said to me:--

“and now tell me all about him.” when it came to speaking to this great
learned man, i began to fear that he would think me a weak fool, and
jonathan a madman--that journal is all so strange--and i hesitated to go
on. but he was so sweet and kind, and he had promised to help, and i
trusted him, so i said:--

“dr. van helsing, what i have to tell you is so queer that you must not
laugh at me or at my husband. i have been since yesterday in a sort of
fever of doubt; you must be kind to me, and not think me foolish that i
have even half believed some very strange things.” he reassured me by
his manner as well as his words when he said:--

“oh, my dear, if you only know how strange is the matter regarding which
i am here, it is you who would laugh. i have learned not to think little
of any one’s belief, no matter how strange it be. i have tried to keep
an open mind; and it is not the ordinary things of life that could close
it, but the strange things, the extraordinary things, the things that
make one doubt if they be mad or sane.”

“thank you, thank you, a thousand times! you have taken a weight off my
mind. if you will let me, i shall give you a paper to read. it is long,
but i have typewritten it out. it will tell you my trouble and
jonathan’s. it is the copy of his journal when abroad, and all that
happened. i dare not say anything of it; you will read for yourself and
judge. and then when i see you, perhaps, you will be very kind and tell
me what you think.”

“i promise,” he said as i gave him the papers; “i shall in the morning,
so soon as i can, come to see you and your husband, if i may.”

“jonathan will be here at half-past eleven, and you must come to lunch
with us and see him then; you could catch the quick 3:34 train, which
will leave you at paddington before eight.” he was surprised at my
knowledge of the trains off-hand, but he does not know that i have made
up all the trains to and from exeter, so that i may help jonathan in
case he is in a hurry.

so he took the papers with him and went away, and i sit here
thinking--thinking i don’t know what.

       *       *       *       *       *

_letter (by hand), van helsing to mrs. harker._

“_25 september, 6 o’clock._

“dear madam mina,--

“i have read your husband’s so wonderful diary. you may sleep without
doubt. strange and terrible as it is, it is _true_! i will pledge my
life on it. it may be worse for others; but for him and you there is no
dread. he is a noble fellow; and let me tell you from experience of men,
that one who would do as he did in going down that wall and to that
room--ay, and going a second time--is not one to be injured in
permanence by a shock. his brain and his heart are all right; this i
swear, before i have even seen him; so be at rest. i shall have much to
ask him of other things. i am blessed that to-day i come to see you, for
i have learn all at once so much that again i am dazzle--dazzle more
than ever, and i must think.

“yours the most faithful,

“abraham van helsing.”


_letter, mrs. harker to van helsing._

“_25 september, 6:30 p. m._

“my dear dr. van helsing,--

“a thousand thanks for your kind letter, which has taken a great weight
off my mind. and yet, if it be true, what terrible things there are in
the world, and what an awful thing if that man, that monster, be really
in london! i fear to think. i have this moment, whilst writing, had a
wire from jonathan, saying that he leaves by the 6:25 to-night from
launceston and will be here at 10:18, so that i shall have no fear
to-night. will you, therefore, instead of lunching with us, please come
to breakfast at eight o’clock, if this be not too early for you? you can
get away, if you are in a hurry, by the 10:30 train, which will bring
you to paddington by 2:35. do not answer this, as i shall take it that,
if i do not hear, you will come to breakfast.

“believe me,

“your faithful and grateful friend,

“mina harker.”


_jonathan harker’s journal._

_26 september._--i thought never to write in this diary again, but the
time has come. when i got home last night mina had supper ready, and
when we had supped she told me of van helsing’s visit, and of her having
given him the two diaries copied out, and of how anxious she has been
about me. she showed me in the doctor’s letter that all i wrote down was
true. it seems to have made a new man of me. it was the doubt as to the
reality of the whole thing that knocked me over. i felt impotent, and in
the dark, and distrustful. but, now that i _know_, i am not afraid, even
of the count. he has succeeded after all, then, in his design in getting
to london, and it was he i saw. he has got younger, and how? van helsing
is the man to unmask him and hunt him out, if he is anything like what
mina says. we sat late, and talked it all over. mina is dressing, and i
shall call at the hotel in a few minutes and bring him over....

he was, i think, surprised to see me. when i came into the room where he
was, and introduced myself, he took me by the shoulder, and turned my
face round to the light, and said, after a sharp scrutiny:--

“but madam mina told me you were ill, that you had had a shock.” it was
so funny to hear my wife called “madam mina” by this kindly,
strong-faced old man. i smiled, and said:--

“i _was_ ill, i _have_ had a shock; but you have cured me already.”

“and how?”

“by your letter to mina last night. i was in doubt, and then everything
took a hue of unreality, and i did not know what to trust, even the
evidence of my own senses. not knowing what to trust, i did not know
what to do; and so had only to keep on working in what had hitherto been
the groove of my life. the groove ceased to avail me, and i mistrusted
myself. doctor, you don’t know what it is to doubt everything, even
yourself. no, you don’t; you couldn’t with eyebrows like yours.” he
seemed pleased, and laughed as he said:--

“so! you are physiognomist. i learn more here with each hour. i am with
so much pleasure coming to you to breakfast; and, oh, sir, you will
pardon praise from an old man, but you are blessed in your wife.” i
would listen to him go on praising mina for a day, so i simply nodded
and stood silent.

“she is one of god’s women, fashioned by his own hand to show us men and
other women that there is a heaven where we can enter, and that its
light can be here on earth. so true, so sweet, so noble, so little an
egoist--and that, let me tell you, is much in this age, so sceptical and
selfish. and you, sir--i have read all the letters to poor miss lucy,
and some of them speak of you, so i know you since some days from the
knowing of others; but i have seen your true self since last night. you
will give me your hand, will you not? and let us be friends for all our
lives.”

we shook hands, and he was so earnest and so kind that it made me quite
choky.

“and now,” he said, “may i ask you for some more help? i have a great
task to do, and at the beginning it is to know. you can help me here.
can you tell me what went before your going to transylvania? later on i
may ask more help, and of a different kind; but at first this will do.”

“look here, sir,” i said, “does what you have to do concern the count?”

“it does,” he said solemnly.

“then i am with you heart and soul. as you go by the 10:30 train, you
will not have time to read them; but i shall get the bundle of papers.
you can take them with you and read them in the train.”

after breakfast i saw him to the station. when we were parting he
said:--

“perhaps you will come to town if i send to you, and take madam mina
too.”

“we shall both come when you will,” i said.

i had got him the morning papers and the london papers of the previous
night, and while we were talking at the carriage window, waiting for the
train to start, he was turning them over. his eyes suddenly seemed to
catch something in one of them, “the westminster gazette”--i knew it by
the colour--and he grew quite white. he read something intently,
groaning to himself: “mein gott! mein gott! so soon! so soon!” i do not
think he remembered me at the moment. just then the whistle blew, and
the train moved off. this recalled him to himself, and he leaned out of
the window and waved his hand, calling out: “love to madam mina; i shall
write so soon as ever i can.”


_dr. seward’s diary._

_26 september._--truly there is no such thing as finality. not a week
since i said “finis,” and yet here i am starting fresh again, or rather
going on with the same record. until this afternoon i had no cause to
think of what is done. renfield had become, to all intents, as sane as
he ever was. he was already well ahead with his fly business; and he had
just started in the spider line also; so he had not been of any trouble
to me. i had a letter from arthur, written on sunday, and from it i
gather that he is bearing up wonderfully well. quincey morris is with
him, and that is much of a help, for he himself is a bubbling well of
good spirits. quincey wrote me a line too, and from him i hear that
arthur is beginning to recover something of his old buoyancy; so as to
them all my mind is at rest. as for myself, i was settling down to my
work with the enthusiasm which i used to have for it, so that i might
fairly have said that the wound which poor lucy left on me was becoming
cicatrised. everything is, however, now reopened; and what is to be the
end god only knows. i have an idea that van helsing thinks he knows,
too, but he will only let out enough at a time to whet curiosity. he
went to exeter yesterday, and stayed there all night. to-day he came
back, and almost bounded into the room at about half-past five o’clock,
and thrust last night’s “westminster gazette” into my hand.

“what do you think of that?” he asked as he stood back and folded his
arms.

i looked over the paper, for i really did not know what he meant; but he
took it from me and pointed out a paragraph about children being decoyed
away at hampstead. it did not convey much to me, until i reached a
passage where it described small punctured wounds on their throats. an
idea struck me, and i looked up. “well?” he said.

“it is like poor lucy’s.”

“and what do you make of it?”

“simply that there is some cause in common. whatever it was that injured
her has injured them.” i did not quite understand his answer:--

“that is true indirectly, but not directly.”

“how do you mean, professor?” i asked. i was a little inclined to take
his seriousness lightly--for, after all, four days of rest and freedom
from burning, harrowing anxiety does help to restore one’s spirits--but
when i saw his face, it sobered me. never, even in the midst of our
despair about poor lucy, had he looked more stern.

“tell me!” i said. “i can hazard no opinion. i do not know what to
think, and i have no data on which to found a conjecture.”

“do you mean to tell me, friend john, that you have no suspicion as to
what poor lucy died of; not after all the hints given, not only by
events, but by me?”

“of nervous prostration following on great loss or waste of blood.”

“and how the blood lost or waste?” i shook my head. he stepped over and
sat down beside me, and went on:--

“you are clever man, friend john; you reason well, and your wit is bold;
but you are too prejudiced. you do not let your eyes see nor your ears
hear, and that which is outside your daily life is not of account to
you. do you not think that there are things which you cannot understand,
and yet which are; that some people see things that others cannot? but
there are things old and new which must not be contemplate by men’s
eyes, because they know--or think they know--some things which other men
have told them. ah, it is the fault of our science that it wants to
explain all; and if it explain not, then it says there is nothing to
explain. but yet we see around us every day the growth of new beliefs,
which think themselves new; and which are yet but the old, which pretend
to be young--like the fine ladies at the opera. i suppose now you do not
believe in corporeal transference. no? nor in materialisation. no? nor
in astral bodies. no? nor in the reading of thought. no? nor in
hypnotism----”

“yes,” i said. “charcot has proved that pretty well.” he smiled as he
went on: “then you are satisfied as to it. yes? and of course then you
understand how it act, and can follow the mind of the great
charcot--alas that he is no more!--into the very soul of the patient
that he influence. no? then, friend john, am i to take it that you
simply accept fact, and are satisfied to let from premise to conclusion
be a blank? no? then tell me--for i am student of the brain--how you
accept the hypnotism and reject the thought reading. let me tell you, my
friend, that there are things done to-day in electrical science which
would have been deemed unholy by the very men who discovered
electricity--who would themselves not so long before have been burned
as wizards. there are always mysteries in life. why was it that
methuselah lived nine hundred years, and ‘old parr’ one hundred and
sixty-nine, and yet that poor lucy, with four men’s blood in her poor
veins, could not live even one day? for, had she live one more day, we
could have save her. do you know all the mystery of life and death? do
you know the altogether of comparative anatomy and can say wherefore the
qualities of brutes are in some men, and not in others? can you tell me
why, when other spiders die small and soon, that one great spider lived
for centuries in the tower of the old spanish church and grew and grew,
till, on descending, he could drink the oil of all the church lamps? can
you tell me why in the pampas, ay and elsewhere, there are bats that
come at night and open the veins of cattle and horses and suck dry their
veins; how in some islands of the western seas there are bats which hang
on the trees all day, and those who have seen describe as like giant
nuts or pods, and that when the sailors sleep on the deck, because that
it is hot, flit down on them, and then--and then in the morning are
found dead men, white as even miss lucy was?”

“good god, professor!” i said, starting up. “do you mean to tell me that
lucy was bitten by such a bat; and that such a thing is here in london
in the nineteenth century?” he waved his hand for silence, and went
on:--

“can you tell me why the tortoise lives more long than generations of
men; why the elephant goes on and on till he have seen dynasties; and
why the parrot never die only of bite of cat or dog or other complaint?
can you tell me why men believe in all ages and places that there are
some few who live on always if they be permit; that there are men and
women who cannot die? we all know--because science has vouched for the
fact--that there have been toads shut up in rocks for thousands of
years, shut in one so small hole that only hold him since the youth of
the world. can you tell me how the indian fakir can make himself to die
and have been buried, and his grave sealed and corn sowed on it, and the
corn reaped and be cut and sown and reaped and cut again, and then men
come and take away the unbroken seal and that there lie the indian
fakir, not dead, but that rise up and walk amongst them as before?” here
i interrupted him. i was getting bewildered; he so crowded on my mind
his list of nature’s eccentricities and possible impossibilities that my
imagination was getting fired. i had a dim idea that he was teaching me
some lesson, as long ago he used to do in his study at amsterdam; but
he used then to tell me the thing, so that i could have the object of
thought in mind all the time. but now i was without this help, yet i
wanted to follow him, so i said:--

“professor, let me be your pet student again. tell me the thesis, so
that i may apply your knowledge as you go on. at present i am going in
my mind from point to point as a mad man, and not a sane one, follows an
idea. i feel like a novice lumbering through a bog in a mist, jumping
from one tussock to another in the mere blind effort to move on without
knowing where i am going.”

“that is good image,” he said. “well, i shall tell you. my thesis is
this: i want you to believe.”

“to believe what?”

“to believe in things that you cannot. let me illustrate. i heard once
of an american who so defined faith: ‘that faculty which enables us to
believe things which we know to be untrue.’ for one, i follow that man.
he meant that we shall have an open mind, and not let a little bit of
truth check the rush of a big truth, like a small rock does a railway
truck. we get the small truth first. good! we keep him, and we value
him; but all the same we must not let him think himself all the truth in
the universe.”

“then you want me not to let some previous conviction injure the
receptivity of my mind with regard to some strange matter. do i read
your lesson aright?”

“ah, you are my favourite pupil still. it is worth to teach you. now
that you are willing to understand, you have taken the first step to
understand. you think then that those so small holes in the children’s
throats were made by the same that made the hole in miss lucy?”

“i suppose so.” he stood up and said solemnly:--

“then you are wrong. oh, would it were so! but alas! no. it is worse,
far, far worse.”

“in god’s name, professor van helsing, what do you mean?” i cried.

he threw himself with a despairing gesture into a chair, and placed his
elbows on the table, covering his face with his hands as he spoke:--

“they were made by miss lucy!”




chapter xv

dr. seward’s diary--_continued_.


for a while sheer anger mastered me; it was as if he had during her life
struck lucy on the face. i smote the table hard and rose up as i said to
him:--

“dr. van helsing, are you mad?” he raised his head and looked at me, and
somehow the tenderness of his face calmed me at once. “would i were!” he
said. “madness were easy to bear compared with truth like this. oh, my
friend, why, think you, did i go so far round, why take so long to tell
you so simple a thing? was it because i hate you and have hated you all
my life? was it because i wished to give you pain? was it that i wanted,
now so late, revenge for that time when you saved my life, and from a
fearful death? ah no!”

“forgive me,” said i. he went on:--

“my friend, it was because i wished to be gentle in the breaking to you,
for i know you have loved that so sweet lady. but even yet i do not
expect you to believe. it is so hard to accept at once any abstract
truth, that we may doubt such to be possible when we have always
believed the ‘no’ of it; it is more hard still to accept so sad a
concrete truth, and of such a one as miss lucy. to-night i go to prove
it. dare you come with me?”

this staggered me. a man does not like to prove such a truth; byron
excepted from the category, jealousy.

    “and prove the very truth he most abhorred.”

he saw my hesitation, and spoke:--

“the logic is simple, no madman’s logic this time, jumping from tussock
to tussock in a misty bog. if it be not true, then proof will be relief;
at worst it will not harm. if it be true! ah, there is the dread; yet
very dread should help my cause, for in it is some need of belief. come,
i tell you what i propose: first, that we go off now and see that child
in the hospital. dr. vincent, of the north hospital, where the papers
say the child is, is friend of mine, and i think of yours since you were
in class at amsterdam. he will let two scientists see his case, if he
will not let two friends. we shall tell him nothing, but only that we
wish to learn. and then----”

“and then?” he took a key from his pocket and held it up. “and then we
spend the night, you and i, in the churchyard where lucy lies. this is
the key that lock the tomb. i had it from the coffin-man to give to
arthur.” my heart sank within me, for i felt that there was some fearful
ordeal before us. i could do nothing, however, so i plucked up what
heart i could and said that we had better hasten, as the afternoon was
passing....

we found the child awake. it had had a sleep and taken some food, and
altogether was going on well. dr. vincent took the bandage from its
throat, and showed us the punctures. there was no mistaking the
similarity to those which had been on lucy’s throat. they were smaller,
and the edges looked fresher; that was all. we asked vincent to what he
attributed them, and he replied that it must have been a bite of some
animal, perhaps a rat; but, for his own part, he was inclined to think
that it was one of the bats which are so numerous on the northern
heights of london. “out of so many harmless ones,” he said, “there may
be some wild specimen from the south of a more malignant species. some
sailor may have brought one home, and it managed to escape; or even from
the zoölogical gardens a young one may have got loose, or one be bred
there from a vampire. these things do occur, you know. only ten days ago
a wolf got out, and was, i believe, traced up in this direction. for a
week after, the children were playing nothing but red riding hood on the
heath and in every alley in the place until this ‘bloofer lady’ scare
came along, since when it has been quite a gala-time with them. even
this poor little mite, when he woke up to-day, asked the nurse if he
might go away. when she asked him why he wanted to go, he said he wanted
to play with the ‘bloofer lady.’”

“i hope,” said van helsing, “that when you are sending the child home
you will caution its parents to keep strict watch over it. these fancies
to stray are most dangerous; and if the child were to remain out another
night, it would probably be fatal. but in any case i suppose you will
not let it away for some days?”

“certainly not, not for a week at least; longer if the wound is not
healed.”

our visit to the hospital took more time than we had reckoned on, and
the sun had dipped before we came out. when van helsing saw how dark it
was, he said:--

“there is no hurry. it is more late than i thought. come, let us seek
somewhere that we may eat, and then we shall go on our way.”

we dined at “jack straw’s castle” along with a little crowd of
bicyclists and others who were genially noisy. about ten o’clock we
started from the inn. it was then very dark, and the scattered lamps
made the darkness greater when we were once outside their individual
radius. the professor had evidently noted the road we were to go, for he
went on unhesitatingly; but, as for me, i was in quite a mixup as to
locality. as we went further, we met fewer and fewer people, till at
last we were somewhat surprised when we met even the patrol of horse
police going their usual suburban round. at last we reached the wall of
the churchyard, which we climbed over. with some little difficulty--for
it was very dark, and the whole place seemed so strange to us--we found
the westenra tomb. the professor took the key, opened the creaky door,
and standing back, politely, but quite unconsciously, motioned me to
precede him. there was a delicious irony in the offer, in the
courtliness of giving preference on such a ghastly occasion. my
companion followed me quickly, and cautiously drew the door to, after
carefully ascertaining that the lock was a falling, and not a spring,
one. in the latter case we should have been in a bad plight. then he
fumbled in his bag, and taking out a matchbox and a piece of candle,
proceeded to make a light. the tomb in the day-time, and when wreathed
with fresh flowers, had looked grim and gruesome enough; but now, some
days afterwards, when the flowers hung lank and dead, their whites
turning to rust and their greens to browns; when the spider and the
beetle had resumed their accustomed dominance; when time-discoloured
stone, and dust-encrusted mortar, and rusty, dank iron, and tarnished
brass, and clouded silver-plating gave back the feeble glimmer of a
candle, the effect was more miserable and sordid than could have been
imagined. it conveyed irresistibly the idea that life--animal life--was
not the only thing which could pass away.

van helsing went about his work systematically. holding his candle so
that he could read the coffin plates, and so holding it that the sperm
dropped in white patches which congealed as they touched the metal, he
made assurance of lucy’s coffin. another search in his bag, and he took
out a turnscrew.

“what are you going to do?” i asked.

“to open the coffin. you shall yet be convinced.” straightway he began
taking out the screws, and finally lifted off the lid, showing the
casing of lead beneath. the sight was almost too much for me. it seemed
to be as much an affront to the dead as it would have been to have
stripped off her clothing in her sleep whilst living; i actually took
hold of his hand to stop him. he only said: “you shall see,” and again
fumbling in his bag, took out a tiny fret-saw. striking the turnscrew
through the lead with a swift downward stab, which made me wince, he
made a small hole, which was, however, big enough to admit the point of
the saw. i had expected a rush of gas from the week-old corpse. we
doctors, who have had to study our dangers, have to become accustomed to
such things, and i drew back towards the door. but the professor never
stopped for a moment; he sawed down a couple of feet along one side of
the lead coffin, and then across, and down the other side. taking the
edge of the loose flange, he bent it back towards the foot of the
coffin, and holding up the candle into the aperture, motioned to me to
look.

i drew near and looked. the coffin was empty.

it was certainly a surprise to me, and gave me a considerable shock, but
van helsing was unmoved. he was now more sure than ever of his ground,
and so emboldened to proceed in his task. “are you satisfied now, friend
john?” he asked.

i felt all the dogged argumentativeness of my nature awake within me as
i answered him:--

“i am satisfied that lucy’s body is not in that coffin; but that only
proves one thing.”

“and what is that, friend john?”

“that it is not there.”

“that is good logic,” he said, “so far as it goes. but how do you--how
can you--account for it not being there?”

“perhaps a body-snatcher,” i suggested. “some of the undertaker’s people
may have stolen it.” i felt that i was speaking folly, and yet it was
the only real cause which i could suggest. the professor sighed. “ah
well!” he said, “we must have more proof. come with me.”

he put on the coffin-lid again, gathered up all his things and placed
them in the bag, blew out the light, and placed the candle also in the
bag. we opened the door, and went out. behind us he closed the door and
locked it. he handed me the key, saying: “will you keep it? you had
better be assured.” i laughed--it was not a very cheerful laugh, i am
bound to say--as i motioned him to keep it. “a key is nothing,” i said;
“there may be duplicates; and anyhow it is not difficult to pick a lock
of that kind.” he said nothing, but put the key in his pocket. then he
told me to watch at one side of the churchyard whilst he would watch at
the other. i took up my place behind a yew-tree, and i saw his dark
figure move until the intervening headstones and trees hid it from my
sight.

it was a lonely vigil. just after i had taken my place i heard a distant
clock strike twelve, and in time came one and two. i was chilled and
unnerved, and angry with the professor for taking me on such an errand
and with myself for coming. i was too cold and too sleepy to be keenly
observant, and not sleepy enough to betray my trust so altogether i had
a dreary, miserable time.

suddenly, as i turned round, i thought i saw something like a white
streak, moving between two dark yew-trees at the side of the churchyard
farthest from the tomb; at the same time a dark mass moved from the
professor’s side of the ground, and hurriedly went towards it. then i
too moved; but i had to go round headstones and railed-off tombs, and i
stumbled over graves. the sky was overcast, and somewhere far off an
early cock crew. a little way off, beyond a line of scattered
juniper-trees, which marked the pathway to the church, a white, dim
figure flitted in the direction of the tomb. the tomb itself was hidden
by trees, and i could not see where the figure disappeared. i heard the
rustle of actual movement where i had first seen the white figure, and
coming over, found the professor holding in his arms a tiny child. when
he saw me he held it out to me, and said:--

“are you satisfied now?”

“no,” i said, in a way that i felt was aggressive.

“do you not see the child?”

“yes, it is a child, but who brought it here? and is it wounded?” i
asked.

“we shall see,” said the professor, and with one impulse we took our way
out of the churchyard, he carrying the sleeping child.

when we had got some little distance away, we went into a clump of
trees, and struck a match, and looked at the child’s throat. it was
without a scratch or scar of any kind.

“was i right?” i asked triumphantly.

“we were just in time,” said the professor thankfully.

we had now to decide what we were to do with the child, and so consulted
about it. if we were to take it to a police-station we should have to
give some account of our movements during the night; at least, we should
have had to make some statement as to how we had come to find the child.
so finally we decided that we would take it to the heath, and when we
heard a policeman coming, would leave it where he could not fail to find
it; we would then seek our way home as quickly as we could. all fell out
well. at the edge of hampstead heath we heard a policeman’s heavy
tramp, and laying the child on the pathway, we waited and watched until
he saw it as he flashed his lantern to and fro. we heard his exclamation
of astonishment, and then we went away silently. by good chance we got a
cab near the “spaniards,” and drove to town.

i cannot sleep, so i make this entry. but i must try to get a few hours’
sleep, as van helsing is to call for me at noon. he insists that i shall
go with him on another expedition.

       *       *       *       *       *

_27 september._--it was two o’clock before we found a suitable
opportunity for our attempt. the funeral held at noon was all completed,
and the last stragglers of the mourners had taken themselves lazily
away, when, looking carefully from behind a clump of alder-trees, we saw
the sexton lock the gate after him. we knew then that we were safe till
morning did we desire it; but the professor told me that we should not
want more than an hour at most. again i felt that horrid sense of the
reality of things, in which any effort of imagination seemed out of
place; and i realised distinctly the perils of the law which we were
incurring in our unhallowed work. besides, i felt it was all so useless.
outrageous as it was to open a leaden coffin, to see if a woman dead
nearly a week were really dead, it now seemed the height of folly to
open the tomb again, when we knew, from the evidence of our own
eyesight, that the coffin was empty. i shrugged my shoulders, however,
and rested silent, for van helsing had a way of going on his own road,
no matter who remonstrated. he took the key, opened the vault, and again
courteously motioned me to precede. the place was not so gruesome as
last night, but oh, how unutterably mean-looking when the sunshine
streamed in. van helsing walked over to lucy’s coffin, and i followed.
he bent over and again forced back the leaden flange; and then a shock
of surprise and dismay shot through me.

there lay lucy, seemingly just as we had seen her the night before her
funeral. she was, if possible, more radiantly beautiful than ever; and i
could not believe that she was dead. the lips were red, nay redder than
before; and on the cheeks was a delicate bloom.

“is this a juggle?” i said to him.

“are you convinced now?” said the professor in response, and as he spoke
he put over his hand, and in a way that made me shudder, pulled back the
dead lips and showed the white teeth.

“see,” he went on, “see, they are even sharper than before. with this
and this”--and he touched one of the canine teeth and that below
it--“the little children can be bitten. are you of belief now, friend
john?” once more, argumentative hostility woke within me. i _could_ not
accept such an overwhelming idea as he suggested; so, with an attempt to
argue of which i was even at the moment ashamed, i said:--

“she may have been placed here since last night.”

“indeed? that is so, and by whom?”

“i do not know. some one has done it.”

“and yet she has been dead one week. most peoples in that time would not
look so.” i had no answer for this, so was silent. van helsing did not
seem to notice my silence; at any rate, he showed neither chagrin nor
triumph. he was looking intently at the face of the dead woman, raising
the eyelids and looking at the eyes, and once more opening the lips and
examining the teeth. then he turned to me and said:--

“here, there is one thing which is different from all recorded; here is
some dual life that is not as the common. she was bitten by the vampire
when she was in a trance, sleep-walking--oh, you start; you do not know
that, friend john, but you shall know it all later--and in trance could
he best come to take more blood. in trance she died, and in trance she
is un-dead, too. so it is that she differ from all other. usually when
the un-dead sleep at home”--as he spoke he made a comprehensive sweep of
his arm to designate what to a vampire was “home”--“their face show what
they are, but this so sweet that was when she not un-dead she go back to
the nothings of the common dead. there is no malign there, see, and so
it make hard that i must kill her in her sleep.” this turned my blood
cold, and it began to dawn upon me that i was accepting van helsing’s
theories; but if she were really dead, what was there of terror in the
idea of killing her? he looked up at me, and evidently saw the change in
my face, for he said almost joyously:--

“ah, you believe now?”

i answered: “do not press me too hard all at once. i am willing to
accept. how will you do this bloody work?”

“i shall cut off her head and fill her mouth with garlic, and i shall
drive a stake through her body.” it made me shudder to think of so
mutilating the body of the woman whom i had loved. and yet the feeling
was not so strong as i had expected. i was, in fact, beginning to
shudder at the presence of this being, this un-dead, as van helsing
called it, and to loathe it. is it possible that love is all subjective,
or all objective?

i waited a considerable time for van helsing to begin, but he stood as
if wrapped in thought. presently he closed the catch of his bag with a
snap, and said:--

“i have been thinking, and have made up my mind as to what is best. if i
did simply follow my inclining i would do now, at this moment, what is
to be done; but there are other things to follow, and things that are
thousand times more difficult in that them we do not know. this is
simple. she have yet no life taken, though that is of time; and to act
now would be to take danger from her for ever. but then we may have to
want arthur, and how shall we tell him of this? if you, who saw the
wounds on lucy’s throat, and saw the wounds so similar on the child’s at
the hospital; if you, who saw the coffin empty last night and full
to-day with a woman who have not change only to be more rose and more
beautiful in a whole week, after she die--if you know of this and know
of the white figure last night that brought the child to the churchyard,
and yet of your own senses you did not believe, how, then, can i expect
arthur, who know none of those things, to believe? he doubted me when i
took him from her kiss when she was dying. i know he has forgiven me
because in some mistaken idea i have done things that prevent him say
good-bye as he ought; and he may think that in some more mistaken idea
this woman was buried alive; and that in most mistake of all we have
killed her. he will then argue back that it is we, mistaken ones, that
have killed her by our ideas; and so he will be much unhappy always. yet
he never can be sure; and that is the worst of all. and he will
sometimes think that she he loved was buried alive, and that will paint
his dreams with horrors of what she must have suffered; and again, he
will think that we may be right, and that his so beloved was, after all,
an un-dead. no! i told him once, and since then i learn much. now, since
i know it is all true, a hundred thousand times more do i know that he
must pass through the bitter waters to reach the sweet. he, poor fellow,
must have one hour that will make the very face of heaven grow black to
him; then we can act for good all round and send him peace. my mind is
made up. let us go. you return home for to-night to your asylum, and see
that all be well. as for me, i shall spend the night here in this
churchyard in my own way. to-morrow night you will come to me to the
berkeley hotel at ten of the clock. i shall send for arthur to come too,
and also that so fine young man of america that gave his blood. later we
shall all have work to do. i come with you so far as piccadilly and
there dine, for i must be back here before the sun set.”

so we locked the tomb and came away, and got over the wall of the
churchyard, which was not much of a task, and drove back to piccadilly.


_note left by van helsing in his portmanteau, berkeley hotel directed to
john seward, m. d._

(not delivered.)

“_27 september._

“friend john,--

“i write this in case anything should happen. i go alone to watch in
that churchyard. it pleases me that the un-dead, miss lucy, shall not
leave to-night, that so on the morrow night she may be more eager.
therefore i shall fix some things she like not--garlic and a
crucifix--and so seal up the door of the tomb. she is young as un-dead,
and will heed. moreover, these are only to prevent her coming out; they
may not prevail on her wanting to get in; for then the un-dead is
desperate, and must find the line of least resistance, whatsoever it may
be. i shall be at hand all the night from sunset till after the sunrise,
and if there be aught that may be learned i shall learn it. for miss
lucy or from her, i have no fear; but that other to whom is there that
she is un-dead, he have now the power to seek her tomb and find shelter.
he is cunning, as i know from mr. jonathan and from the way that all
along he have fooled us when he played with us for miss lucy’s life, and
we lost; and in many ways the un-dead are strong. he have always the
strength in his hand of twenty men; even we four who gave our strength
to miss lucy it also is all to him. besides, he can summon his wolf and
i know not what. so if it be that he come thither on this night he shall
find me; but none other shall--until it be too late. but it may be that
he will not attempt the place. there is no reason why he should; his
hunting ground is more full of game than the churchyard where the
un-dead woman sleep, and the one old man watch.

“therefore i write this in case.... take the papers that are with this,
the diaries of harker and the rest, and read them, and then find this
great un-dead, and cut off his head and burn his heart or drive a stake
through it, so that the world may rest from him.

“if it be so, farewell.

“van helsing.”



_dr. seward’s diary._

_28 september._--it is wonderful what a good night’s sleep will do for
one. yesterday i was almost willing to accept van helsing’s monstrous
ideas; but now they seem to start out lurid before me as outrages on
common sense. i have no doubt that he believes it all. i wonder if his
mind can have become in any way unhinged. surely there must be _some_
rational explanation of all these mysterious things. is it possible that
the professor can have done it himself? he is so abnormally clever that
if he went off his head he would carry out his intent with regard to
some fixed idea in a wonderful way. i am loath to think it, and indeed
it would be almost as great a marvel as the other to find that van
helsing was mad; but anyhow i shall watch him carefully. i may get some
light on the mystery.

       *       *       *       *       *

_29 september, morning._.... last night, at a little before ten o’clock,
arthur and quincey came into van helsing’s room; he told us all that he
wanted us to do, but especially addressing himself to arthur, as if all
our wills were centred in his. he began by saying that he hoped we would
all come with him too, “for,” he said, “there is a grave duty to be done
there. you were doubtless surprised at my letter?” this query was
directly addressed to lord godalming.

“i was. it rather upset me for a bit. there has been so much trouble
around my house of late that i could do without any more. i have been
curious, too, as to what you mean. quincey and i talked it over; but the
more we talked, the more puzzled we got, till now i can say for myself
that i’m about up a tree as to any meaning about anything.”

“me too,” said quincey morris laconically.

“oh,” said the professor, “then you are nearer the beginning, both of
you, than friend john here, who has to go a long way back before he can
even get so far as to begin.”

it was evident that he recognised my return to my old doubting frame of
mind without my saying a word. then, turning to the other two, he said
with intense gravity:--

“i want your permission to do what i think good this night. it is, i
know, much to ask; and when you know what it is i propose to do you will
know, and only then, how much. therefore may i ask that you promise me
in the dark, so that afterwards, though you may be angry with me for a
time--i must not disguise from myself the possibility that such may
be--you shall not blame yourselves for anything.”

“that’s frank anyhow,” broke in quincey. “i’ll answer for the professor.
i don’t quite see his drift, but i swear he’s honest; and that’s good
enough for me.”

“i thank you, sir,” said van helsing proudly. “i have done myself the
honour of counting you one trusting friend, and such endorsement is dear
to me.” he held out a hand, which quincey took.

then arthur spoke out:--

“dr. van helsing, i don’t quite like to ‘buy a pig in a poke,’ as they
say in scotland, and if it be anything in which my honour as a gentleman
or my faith as a christian is concerned, i cannot make such a promise.
if you can assure me that what you intend does not violate either of
these two, then i give my consent at once; though for the life of me, i
cannot understand what you are driving at.”

“i accept your limitation,” said van helsing, “and all i ask of you is
that if you feel it necessary to condemn any act of mine, you will first
consider it well and be satisfied that it does not violate your
reservations.”

“agreed!” said arthur; “that is only fair. and now that the
_pourparlers_ are over, may i ask what it is we are to do?”

“i want you to come with me, and to come in secret, to the churchyard at
kingstead.”

arthur’s face fell as he said in an amazed sort of way:--

“where poor lucy is buried?” the professor bowed. arthur went on: “and
when there?”

“to enter the tomb!” arthur stood up.

“professor, are you in earnest; or it is some monstrous joke? pardon me,
i see that you are in earnest.” he sat down again, but i could see that
he sat firmly and proudly, as one who is on his dignity. there was
silence until he asked again:--

“and when in the tomb?”

“to open the coffin.”

“this is too much!” he said, angrily rising again. “i am willing to be
patient in all things that are reasonable; but in this--this desecration
of the grave--of one who----” he fairly choked with indignation. the
professor looked pityingly at him.

“if i could spare you one pang, my poor friend,” he said, “god knows i
would. but this night our feet must tread in thorny paths; or later, and
for ever, the feet you love must walk in paths of flame!”

arthur looked up with set white face and said:--

“take care, sir, take care!”

“would it not be well to hear what i have to say?” said van helsing.
“and then you will at least know the limit of my purpose. shall i go
on?”

“that’s fair enough,” broke in morris.

after a pause van helsing went on, evidently with an effort:--

“miss lucy is dead; is it not so? yes! then there can be no wrong to
her. but if she be not dead----”

arthur jumped to his feet.

“good god!” he cried. “what do you mean? has there been any mistake; has
she been buried alive?” he groaned in anguish that not even hope could
soften.

“i did not say she was alive, my child; i did not think it. i go no
further than to say that she might be un-dead.”

“un-dead! not alive! what do you mean? is this all a nightmare, or what
is it?”

“there are mysteries which men can only guess at, which age by age they
may solve only in part. believe me, we are now on the verge of one. but
i have not done. may i cut off the head of dead miss lucy?”

“heavens and earth, no!” cried arthur in a storm of passion. “not for
the wide world will i consent to any mutilation of her dead body. dr.
van helsing, you try me too far. what have i done to you that you should
torture me so? what did that poor, sweet girl do that you should want to
cast such dishonour on her grave? are you mad to speak such things, or
am i mad to listen to them? don’t dare to think more of such a
desecration; i shall not give my consent to anything you do. i have a
duty to do in protecting her grave from outrage; and, by god, i shall do
it!”

van helsing rose up from where he had all the time been seated, and
said, gravely and sternly:--

“my lord godalming, i, too, have a duty to do, a duty to others, a duty
to you, a duty to the dead; and, by god, i shall do it! all i ask you
now is that you come with me, that you look and listen; and if when
later i make the same request you do not be more eager for its
fulfilment even than i am, then--then i shall do my duty, whatever it
may seem to me. and then, to follow of your lordship’s wishes i shall
hold myself at your disposal to render an account to you, when and where
you will.” his voice broke a little, and he went on with a voice full of
pity:--

“but, i beseech you, do not go forth in anger with me. in a long life of
acts which were often not pleasant to do, and which sometimes did wring
my heart, i have never had so heavy a task as now. believe me that if
the time comes for you to change your mind towards me, one look from
you will wipe away all this so sad hour, for i would do what a man can
to save you from sorrow. just think. for why should i give myself so
much of labour and so much of sorrow? i have come here from my own land
to do what i can of good; at the first to please my friend john, and
then to help a sweet young lady, whom, too, i came to love. for her--i
am ashamed to say so much, but i say it in kindness--i gave what you
gave; the blood of my veins; i gave it, i, who was not, like you, her
lover, but only her physician and her friend. i gave to her my nights
and days--before death, after death; and if my death can do her good
even now, when she is the dead un-dead, she shall have it freely.” he
said this with a very grave, sweet pride, and arthur was much affected
by it. he took the old man’s hand and said in a broken voice:--

“oh, it is hard to think of it, and i cannot understand; but at least i
shall go with you and wait.”




chapter xvi

dr. seward’s diary--_continued_


it was just a quarter before twelve o’clock when we got into the
churchyard over the low wall. the night was dark with occasional gleams
of moonlight between the rents of the heavy clouds that scudded across
the sky. we all kept somehow close together, with van helsing slightly
in front as he led the way. when we had come close to the tomb i looked
well at arthur, for i feared that the proximity to a place laden with so
sorrowful a memory would upset him; but he bore himself well. i took it
that the very mystery of the proceeding was in some way a counteractant
to his grief. the professor unlocked the door, and seeing a natural
hesitation amongst us for various reasons, solved the difficulty by
entering first himself. the rest of us followed, and he closed the door.
he then lit a dark lantern and pointed to the coffin. arthur stepped
forward hesitatingly; van helsing said to me:--

“you were with me here yesterday. was the body of miss lucy in that
coffin?”

“it was.” the professor turned to the rest saying:--

“you hear; and yet there is no one who does not believe with me.” he
took his screwdriver and again took off the lid of the coffin. arthur
looked on, very pale but silent; when the lid was removed he stepped
forward. he evidently did not know that there was a leaden coffin, or,
at any rate, had not thought of it. when he saw the rent in the lead,
the blood rushed to his face for an instant, but as quickly fell away
again, so that he remained of a ghastly whiteness; he was still silent.
van helsing forced back the leaden flange, and we all looked in and
recoiled.

the coffin was empty!

for several minutes no one spoke a word. the silence was broken by
quincey morris:--

“professor, i answered for you. your word is all i want. i wouldn’t ask
such a thing ordinarily--i wouldn’t so dishonour you as to imply a
doubt; but this is a mystery that goes beyond any honour or dishonour.
is this your doing?”

“i swear to you by all that i hold sacred that i have not removed nor
touched her. what happened was this: two nights ago my friend seward and
i came here--with good purpose, believe me. i opened that coffin, which
was then sealed up, and we found it, as now, empty. we then waited, and
saw something white come through the trees. the next day we came here in
day-time, and she lay there. did she not, friend john?”

“yes.”

“that night we were just in time. one more so small child was missing,
and we find it, thank god, unharmed amongst the graves. yesterday i came
here before sundown, for at sundown the un-dead can move. i waited here
all the night till the sun rose, but i saw nothing. it was most probable
that it was because i had laid over the clamps of those doors garlic,
which the un-dead cannot bear, and other things which they shun. last
night there was no exodus, so to-night before the sundown i took away my
garlic and other things. and so it is we find this coffin empty. but
bear with me. so far there is much that is strange. wait you with me
outside, unseen and unheard, and things much stranger are yet to be.
so”--here he shut the dark slide of his lantern--“now to the outside.”
he opened the door, and we filed out, he coming last and locking the
door behind him.

oh! but it seemed fresh and pure in the night air after the terror of
that vault. how sweet it was to see the clouds race by, and the passing
gleams of the moonlight between the scudding clouds crossing and
passing--like the gladness and sorrow of a man’s life; how sweet it was
to breathe the fresh air, that had no taint of death and decay; how
humanising to see the red lighting of the sky beyond the hill, and to
hear far away the muffled roar that marks the life of a great city. each
in his own way was solemn and overcome. arthur was silent, and was, i
could see, striving to grasp the purpose and the inner meaning of the
mystery. i was myself tolerably patient, and half inclined again to
throw aside doubt and to accept van helsing’s conclusions. quincey
morris was phlegmatic in the way of a man who accepts all things, and
accepts them in the spirit of cool bravery, with hazard of all he has to
stake. not being able to smoke, he cut himself a good-sized plug of
tobacco and began to chew. as to van helsing, he was employed in a
definite way. first he took from his bag a mass of what looked like
thin, wafer-like biscuit, which was carefully rolled up in a white
napkin; next he took out a double-handful of some whitish stuff, like
dough or putty. he crumbled the wafer up fine and worked it into the
mass between his hands. this he then took, and rolling it into thin
strips, began to lay them into the crevices between the door and its
setting in the tomb. i was somewhat puzzled at this, and being close,
asked him what it was that he was doing. arthur and quincey drew near
also, as they too were curious. he answered:--

“i am closing the tomb, so that the un-dead may not enter.”

“and is that stuff you have put there going to do it?” asked quincey.
“great scott! is this a game?”

“it is.”

“what is that which you are using?” this time the question was by
arthur. van helsing reverently lifted his hat as he answered:--

“the host. i brought it from amsterdam. i have an indulgence.” it was an
answer that appalled the most sceptical of us, and we felt individually
that in the presence of such earnest purpose as the professor’s, a
purpose which could thus use the to him most sacred of things, it was
impossible to distrust. in respectful silence we took the places
assigned to us close round the tomb, but hidden from the sight of any
one approaching. i pitied the others, especially arthur. i had myself
been apprenticed by my former visits to this watching horror; and yet i,
who had up to an hour ago repudiated the proofs, felt my heart sink
within me. never did tombs look so ghastly white; never did cypress, or
yew, or juniper so seem the embodiment of funereal gloom; never did tree
or grass wave or rustle so ominously; never did bough creak so
mysteriously; and never did the far-away howling of dogs send such a
woeful presage through the night.

there was a long spell of silence, a big, aching void, and then from the
professor a keen “s-s-s-s!” he pointed; and far down the avenue of yews
we saw a white figure advance--a dim white figure, which held something
dark at its breast. the figure stopped, and at the moment a ray of
moonlight fell upon the masses of driving clouds and showed in startling
prominence a dark-haired woman, dressed in the cerements of the grave.
we could not see the face, for it was bent down over what we saw to be a
fair-haired child. there was a pause and a sharp little cry, such as a
child gives in sleep, or a dog as it lies before the fire and dreams. we
were starting forward, but the professor’s warning hand, seen by us as
he stood behind a yew-tree, kept us back; and then as we looked the
white figure moved forwards again. it was now near enough for us to see
clearly, and the moonlight still held. my own heart grew cold as ice,
and i could hear the gasp of arthur, as we recognised the features of
lucy westenra. lucy westenra, but yet how changed. the sweetness was
turned to adamantine, heartless cruelty, and the purity to voluptuous
wantonness. van helsing stepped out, and, obedient to his gesture, we
all advanced too; the four of us ranged in a line before the door of the
tomb. van helsing raised his lantern and drew the slide; by the
concentrated light that fell on lucy’s face we could see that the lips
were crimson with fresh blood, and that the stream had trickled over her
chin and stained the purity of her lawn death-robe.

we shuddered with horror. i could see by the tremulous light that even
van helsing’s iron nerve had failed. arthur was next to me, and if i had
not seized his arm and held him up, he would have fallen.

when lucy--i call the thing that was before us lucy because it bore her
shape--saw us she drew back with an angry snarl, such as a cat gives
when taken unawares; then her eyes ranged over us. lucy’s eyes in form
and colour; but lucy’s eyes unclean and full of hell-fire, instead of
the pure, gentle orbs we knew. at that moment the remnant of my love
passed into hate and loathing; had she then to be killed, i could have
done it with savage delight. as she looked, her eyes blazed with unholy
light, and the face became wreathed with a voluptuous smile. oh, god,
how it made me shudder to see it! with a careless motion, she flung to
the ground, callous as a devil, the child that up to now she had
clutched strenuously to her breast, growling over it as a dog growls
over a bone. the child gave a sharp cry, and lay there moaning. there
was a cold-bloodedness in the act which wrung a groan from arthur; when
she advanced to him with outstretched arms and a wanton smile he fell
back and hid his face in his hands.

she still advanced, however, and with a languorous, voluptuous grace,
said:--

“come to me, arthur. leave these others and come to me. my arms are
hungry for you. come, and we can rest together. come, my husband, come!”

there was something diabolically sweet in her tones--something of the
tingling of glass when struck--which rang through the brains even of us
who heard the words addressed to another. as for arthur, he seemed under
a spell; moving his hands from his face, he opened wide his arms. she
was leaping for them, when van helsing sprang forward and held between
them his little golden crucifix. she recoiled from it, and, with a
suddenly distorted face, full of rage, dashed past him as if to enter
the tomb.

when within a foot or two of the door, however, she stopped, as if
arrested by some irresistible force. then she turned, and her face was
shown in the clear burst of moonlight and by the lamp, which had now no
quiver from van helsing’s iron nerves. never did i see such baffled
malice on a face; and never, i trust, shall such ever be seen again by
mortal eyes. the beautiful colour became livid, the eyes seemed to throw
out sparks of hell-fire, the brows were wrinkled as though the folds of
the flesh were the coils of medusa’s snakes, and the lovely,
blood-stained mouth grew to an open square, as in the passion masks of
the greeks and japanese. if ever a face meant death--if looks could
kill--we saw it at that moment.

and so for full half a minute, which seemed an eternity, she remained
between the lifted crucifix and the sacred closing of her means of
entry. van helsing broke the silence by asking arthur:--

“answer me, oh my friend! am i to proceed in my work?”

arthur threw himself on his knees, and hid his face in his hands, as he
answered:--

“do as you will, friend; do as you will. there can be no horror like
this ever any more;” and he groaned in spirit. quincey and i
simultaneously moved towards him, and took his arms. we could hear the
click of the closing lantern as van helsing held it down; coming close
to the tomb, he began to remove from the chinks some of the sacred
emblem which he had placed there. we all looked on in horrified
amazement as we saw, when he stood back, the woman, with a corporeal
body as real at that moment as our own, pass in through the interstice
where scarce a knife-blade could have gone. we all felt a glad sense of
relief when we saw the professor calmly restoring the strings of putty
to the edges of the door.

when this was done, he lifted the child and said:

“come now, my friends; we can do no more till to-morrow. there is a
funeral at noon, so here we shall all come before long after that. the
friends of the dead will all be gone by two, and when the sexton lock
the gate we shall remain. then there is more to do; but not like this of
to-night. as for this little one, he is not much harm, and by to-morrow
night he shall be well. we shall leave him where the police will find
him, as on the other night; and then to home.” coming close to arthur,
he said:--

“my friend arthur, you have had a sore trial; but after, when you look
back, you will see how it was necessary. you are now in the bitter
waters, my child. by this time to-morrow you will, please god, have
passed them, and have drunk of the sweet waters; so do not mourn
overmuch. till then i shall not ask you to forgive me.”

arthur and quincey came home with me, and we tried to cheer each other
on the way. we had left the child in safety, and were tired; so we all
slept with more or less reality of sleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

_29 september, night._--a little before twelve o’clock we three--arthur,
quincey morris, and myself--called for the professor. it was odd to
notice that by common consent we had all put on black clothes. of
course, arthur wore black, for he was in deep mourning, but the rest of
us wore it by instinct. we got to the churchyard by half-past one, and
strolled about, keeping out of official observation, so that when the
gravediggers had completed their task and the sexton under the belief
that every one had gone, had locked the gate, we had the place all to
ourselves. van helsing, instead of his little black bag, had with him a
long leather one, something like a cricketing bag; it was manifestly of
fair weight.

when we were alone and had heard the last of the footsteps die out up
the road, we silently, and as if by ordered intention, followed the
professor to the tomb. he unlocked the door, and we entered, closing it
behind us. then he took from his bag the lantern, which he lit, and also
two wax candles, which, when lighted, he stuck, by melting their own
ends, on other coffins, so that they might give light sufficient to work
by. when he again lifted the lid off lucy’s coffin we all looked--arthur
trembling like an aspen--and saw that the body lay there in all its
death-beauty. but there was no love in my own heart, nothing but
loathing for the foul thing which had taken lucy’s shape without her
soul. i could see even arthur’s face grow hard as he looked. presently
he said to van helsing:--

“is this really lucy’s body, or only a demon in her shape?”

“it is her body, and yet not it. but wait a while, and you all see her
as she was, and is.”

she seemed like a nightmare of lucy as she lay there; the pointed teeth,
the bloodstained, voluptuous mouth--which it made one shudder to
see--the whole carnal and unspiritual appearance, seeming like a
devilish mockery of lucy’s sweet purity. van helsing, with his usual
methodicalness, began taking the various contents from his bag and
placing them ready for use. first he took out a soldering iron and some
plumbing solder, and then a small oil-lamp, which gave out, when lit in
a corner of the tomb, gas which burned at fierce heat with a blue
flame; then his operating knives, which he placed to hand; and last a
round wooden stake, some two and a half or three inches thick and about
three feet long. one end of it was hardened by charring in the fire, and
was sharpened to a fine point. with this stake came a heavy hammer, such
as in households is used in the coal-cellar for breaking the lumps. to
me, a doctor’s preparations for work of any kind are stimulating and
bracing, but the effect of these things on both arthur and quincey was
to cause them a sort of consternation. they both, however, kept their
courage, and remained silent and quiet.

when all was ready, van helsing said:--

“before we do anything, let me tell you this; it is out of the lore and
experience of the ancients and of all those who have studied the powers
of the un-dead. when they become such, there comes with the change the
curse of immortality; they cannot die, but must go on age after age
adding new victims and multiplying the evils of the world; for all that
die from the preying of the un-dead becomes themselves un-dead, and prey
on their kind. and so the circle goes on ever widening, like as the
ripples from a stone thrown in the water. friend arthur, if you had met
that kiss which you know of before poor lucy die; or again, last night
when you open your arms to her, you would in time, when you had died,
have become _nosferatu_, as they call it in eastern europe, and would
all time make more of those un-deads that so have fill us with horror.
the career of this so unhappy dear lady is but just begun. those
children whose blood she suck are not as yet so much the worse; but if
she live on, un-dead, more and more they lose their blood and by her
power over them they come to her; and so she draw their blood with that
so wicked mouth. but if she die in truth, then all cease; the tiny
wounds of the throats disappear, and they go back to their plays
unknowing ever of what has been. but of the most blessed of all, when
this now un-dead be made to rest as true dead, then the soul of the poor
lady whom we love shall again be free. instead of working wickedness by
night and growing more debased in the assimilating of it by day, she
shall take her place with the other angels. so that, my friend, it will
be a blessed hand for her that shall strike the blow that sets her free.
to this i am willing; but is there none amongst us who has a better
right? will it be no joy to think of hereafter in the silence of the
night when sleep is not: ‘it was my hand that sent her to the stars; it
was the hand of him that loved her best; the hand that of all she would
herself have chosen, had it been to her to choose?’ tell me if there be
such a one amongst us?”

we all looked at arthur. he saw, too, what we all did, the infinite
kindness which suggested that his should be the hand which would restore
lucy to us as a holy, and not an unholy, memory; he stepped forward and
said bravely, though his hand trembled, and his face was as pale as
snow:--

“my true friend, from the bottom of my broken heart i thank you. tell me
what i am to do, and i shall not falter!” van helsing laid a hand on his
shoulder, and said:--

“brave lad! a moment’s courage, and it is done. this stake must be
driven through her. it will be a fearful ordeal--be not deceived in
that--but it will be only a short time, and you will then rejoice more
than your pain was great; from this grim tomb you will emerge as though
you tread on air. but you must not falter when once you have begun. only
think that we, your true friends, are round you, and that we pray for
you all the time.”

“go on,” said arthur hoarsely. “tell me what i am to do.”

“take this stake in your left hand, ready to place the point over the
heart, and the hammer in your right. then when we begin our prayer for
the dead--i shall read him, i have here the book, and the others shall
follow--strike in god’s name, that so all may be well with the dead that
we love and that the un-dead pass away.”

arthur took the stake and the hammer, and when once his mind was set on
action his hands never trembled nor even quivered. van helsing opened
his missal and began to read, and quincey and i followed as well as we
could. arthur placed the point over the heart, and as i looked i could
see its dint in the white flesh. then he struck with all his might.

the thing in the coffin writhed; and a hideous, blood-curdling screech
came from the opened red lips. the body shook and quivered and twisted
in wild contortions; the sharp white teeth champed together till the
lips were cut, and the mouth was smeared with a crimson foam. but arthur
never faltered. he looked like a figure of thor as his untrembling arm
rose and fell, driving deeper and deeper the mercy-bearing stake, whilst
the blood from the pierced heart welled and spurted up around it. his
face was set, and high duty seemed to shine through it; the sight of it
gave us courage so that our voices seemed to ring through the little
vault.

and then the writhing and quivering of the body became less, and the
teeth seemed to champ, and the face to quiver. finally it lay still. the
terrible task was over.

the hammer fell from arthur’s hand. he reeled and would have fallen had
we not caught him. the great drops of sweat sprang from his forehead,
and his breath came in broken gasps. it had indeed been an awful strain
on him; and had he not been forced to his task by more than human
considerations he could never have gone through with it. for a few
minutes we were so taken up with him that we did not look towards the
coffin. when we did, however, a murmur of startled surprise ran from one
to the other of us. we gazed so eagerly that arthur rose, for he had
been seated on the ground, and came and looked too; and then a glad,
strange light broke over his face and dispelled altogether the gloom of
horror that lay upon it.

there, in the coffin lay no longer the foul thing that we had so dreaded
and grown to hate that the work of her destruction was yielded as a
privilege to the one best entitled to it, but lucy as we had seen her in
her life, with her face of unequalled sweetness and purity. true that
there were there, as we had seen them in life, the traces of care and
pain and waste; but these were all dear to us, for they marked her truth
to what we knew. one and all we felt that the holy calm that lay like
sunshine over the wasted face and form was only an earthly token and
symbol of the calm that was to reign for ever.

van helsing came and laid his hand on arthur’s shoulder, and said to
him:--

“and now, arthur my friend, dear lad, am i not forgiven?”

the reaction of the terrible strain came as he took the old man’s hand
in his, and raising it to his lips, pressed it, and said:--

“forgiven! god bless you that you have given my dear one her soul again,
and me peace.” he put his hands on the professor’s shoulder, and laying
his head on his breast, cried for a while silently, whilst we stood
unmoving. when he raised his head van helsing said to him:--

“and now, my child, you may kiss her. kiss her dead lips if you will, as
she would have you to, if for her to choose. for she is not a grinning
devil now--not any more a foul thing for all eternity. no longer she is
the devil’s un-dead. she is god’s true dead, whose soul is with him!”

arthur bent and kissed her, and then we sent him and quincey out of the
tomb; the professor and i sawed the top off the stake, leaving the point
of it in the body. then we cut off the head and filled the mouth with
garlic. we soldered up the leaden coffin, screwed on the coffin-lid,
and gathering up our belongings, came away. when the professor locked
the door he gave the key to arthur.

outside the air was sweet, the sun shone, and the birds sang, and it
seemed as if all nature were tuned to a different pitch. there was
gladness and mirth and peace everywhere, for we were at rest ourselves
on one account, and we were glad, though it was with a tempered joy.

before we moved away van helsing said:--

“now, my friends, one step of our work is done, one the most harrowing
to ourselves. but there remains a greater task: to find out the author
of all this our sorrow and to stamp him out. i have clues which we can
follow; but it is a long task, and a difficult, and there is danger in
it, and pain. shall you not all help me? we have learned to believe, all
of us--is it not so? and since so, do we not see our duty? yes! and do
we not promise to go on to the bitter end?”

each in turn, we took his hand, and the promise was made. then said the
professor as we moved off:--

“two nights hence you shall meet with me and dine together at seven of
the clock with friend john. i shall entreat two others, two that you
know not as yet; and i shall be ready to all our work show and our plans
unfold. friend john, you come with me home, for i have much to consult
about, and you can help me. to-night i leave for amsterdam, but shall
return to-morrow night. and then begins our great quest. but first i
shall have much to say, so that you may know what is to do and to dread.
then our promise shall be made to each other anew; for there is a
terrible task before us, and once our feet are on the ploughshare we
must not draw back.”




chapter xvii

dr. seward’s diary--_continued_


when we arrived at the berkeley hotel, van helsing found a telegram
waiting for him:--

     “am coming up by train. jonathan at whitby. important news.--mina
     harker.”

the professor was delighted. “ah, that wonderful madam mina,” he said,
“pearl among women! she arrive, but i cannot stay. she must go to your
house, friend john. you must meet her at the station. telegraph her _en
route_, so that she may be prepared.”

when the wire was despatched he had a cup of tea; over it he told me of
a diary kept by jonathan harker when abroad, and gave me a typewritten
copy of it, as also of mrs. harker’s diary at whitby. “take these,” he
said, “and study them well. when i have returned you will be master of
all the facts, and we can then better enter on our inquisition. keep
them safe, for there is in them much of treasure. you will need all your
faith, even you who have had such an experience as that of to-day. what
is here told,” he laid his hand heavily and gravely on the packet of
papers as he spoke, “may be the beginning of the end to you and me and
many another; or it may sound the knell of the un-dead who walk the
earth. read all, i pray you, with the open mind; and if you can add in
any way to the story here told do so, for it is all-important. you have
kept diary of all these so strange things; is it not so? yes! then we
shall go through all these together when we meet.” he then made ready
for his departure, and shortly after drove off to liverpool street. i
took my way to paddington, where i arrived about fifteen minutes before
the train came in.

the crowd melted away, after the bustling fashion common to arrival
platforms; and i was beginning to feel uneasy, lest i might miss my
guest, when a sweet-faced, dainty-looking girl stepped up to me, and,
after a quick glance, said: “dr. seward, is it not?”

“and you are mrs. harker!” i answered at once; whereupon she held out
her hand.

“i knew you from the description of poor dear lucy; but----” she stopped
suddenly, and a quick blush overspread her face.

the blush that rose to my own cheeks somehow set us both at ease, for it
was a tacit answer to her own. i got her luggage, which included a
typewriter, and we took the underground to fenchurch street, after i had
sent a wire to my housekeeper to have a sitting-room and bedroom
prepared at once for mrs. harker.

in due time we arrived. she knew, of course, that the place was a
lunatic asylum, but i could see that she was unable to repress a shudder
when we entered.

she told me that, if she might, she would come presently to my study, as
she had much to say. so here i am finishing my entry in my phonograph
diary whilst i await her. as yet i have not had the chance of looking at
the papers which van helsing left with me, though they lie open before
me. i must get her interested in something, so that i may have an
opportunity of reading them. she does not know how precious time is, or
what a task we have in hand. i must be careful not to frighten her. here
she is!


_mina harker’s journal._

_29 september._--after i had tidied myself, i went down to dr. seward’s
study. at the door i paused a moment, for i thought i heard him talking
with some one. as, however, he had pressed me to be quick, i knocked at
the door, and on his calling out, “come in,” i entered.

to my intense surprise, there was no one with him. he was quite alone,
and on the table opposite him was what i knew at once from the
description to be a phonograph. i had never seen one, and was much
interested.

“i hope i did not keep you waiting,” i said; “but i stayed at the door
as i heard you talking, and thought there was some one with you.”

“oh,” he replied with a smile, “i was only entering my diary.”

“your diary?” i asked him in surprise.

“yes,” he answered. “i keep it in this.” as he spoke he laid his hand on
the phonograph. i felt quite excited over it, and blurted out:--

“why, this beats even shorthand! may i hear it say something?”

“certainly,” he replied with alacrity, and stood up to put it in train
for speaking. then he paused, and a troubled look overspread his face.

“the fact is,” he began awkwardly, “i only keep my diary in it; and as
it is entirely--almost entirely--about my cases, it may be awkward--that
is, i mean----” he stopped, and i tried to help him out of his
embarrassment:--

“you helped to attend dear lucy at the end. let me hear how she died;
for all that i know of her, i shall be very grateful. she was very, very
dear to me.”

to my surprise, he answered, with a horrorstruck look in his face:--

“tell you of her death? not for the wide world!”

“why not?” i asked, for some grave, terrible feeling was coming over me.
again he paused, and i could see that he was trying to invent an excuse.
at length he stammered out:--

“you see, i do not know how to pick out any particular part of the
diary.” even while he was speaking an idea dawned upon him, and he said
with unconscious simplicity, in a different voice, and with the naïveté
of a child: “that’s quite true, upon my honour. honest indian!” i could
not but smile, at which he grimaced. “i gave myself away that time!” he
said. “but do you know that, although i have kept the diary for months
past, it never once struck me how i was going to find any particular
part of it in case i wanted to look it up?” by this time my mind was
made up that the diary of a doctor who attended lucy might have
something to add to the sum of our knowledge of that terrible being, and
i said boldly:--

“then, dr. seward, you had better let me copy it out for you on my
typewriter.” he grew to a positively deathly pallor as he said:--

“no! no! no! for all the world, i wouldn’t let you know that terrible
story!”

then it was terrible; my intuition was right! for a moment i thought,
and as my eyes ranged the room, unconsciously looking for something or
some opportunity to aid me, they lit on a great batch of typewriting on
the table. his eyes caught the look in mine, and, without his thinking,
followed their direction. as they saw the parcel he realised my meaning.

“you do not know me,” i said. “when you have read those papers--my own
diary and my husband’s also, which i have typed--you will know me
better. i have not faltered in giving every thought of my own heart in
this cause; but, of course, you do not know me--yet; and i must not
expect you to trust me so far.”

he is certainly a man of noble nature; poor dear lucy was right about
him. he stood up and opened a large drawer, in which were arranged in
order a number of hollow cylinders of metal covered with dark wax, and
said:--

“you are quite right. i did not trust you because i did not know you.
but i know you now; and let me say that i should have known you long
ago. i know that lucy told you of me; she told me of you too. may i make
the only atonement in my power? take the cylinders and hear them--the
first half-dozen of them are personal to me, and they will not horrify
you; then you will know me better. dinner will by then be ready. in the
meantime i shall read over some of these documents, and shall be better
able to understand certain things.” he carried the phonograph himself up
to my sitting-room and adjusted it for me. now i shall learn something
pleasant, i am sure; for it will tell me the other side of a true love
episode of which i know one side already....


_dr. seward’s diary._

_29 september._--i was so absorbed in that wonderful diary of jonathan
harker and that other of his wife that i let the time run on without
thinking. mrs. harker was not down when the maid came to announce
dinner, so i said: “she is possibly tired; let dinner wait an hour,” and
i went on with my work. i had just finished mrs. harker’s diary, when
she came in. she looked sweetly pretty, but very sad, and her eyes were
flushed with crying. this somehow moved me much. of late i have had
cause for tears, god knows! but the relief of them was denied me; and
now the sight of those sweet eyes, brightened with recent tears, went
straight to my heart. so i said as gently as i could:--

“i greatly fear i have distressed you.”

“oh, no, not distressed me,” she replied, “but i have been more touched
than i can say by your grief. that is a wonderful machine, but it is
cruelly true. it told me, in its very tones, the anguish of your heart.
it was like a soul crying out to almighty god. no one must hear them
spoken ever again! see, i have tried to be useful. i have copied out the
words on my typewriter, and none other need now hear your heart beat, as
i did.”

“no one need ever know, shall ever know,” i said in a low voice. she
laid her hand on mine and said very gravely:--

“ah, but they must!”

“must! but why?” i asked.

“because it is a part of the terrible story, a part of poor dear lucy’s
death and all that led to it; because in the struggle which we have
before us to rid the earth of this terrible monster we must have all
the knowledge and all the help which we can get. i think that the
cylinders which you gave me contained more than you intended me to know;
but i can see that there are in your record many lights to this dark
mystery. you will let me help, will you not? i know all up to a certain
point; and i see already, though your diary only took me to 7 september,
how poor lucy was beset, and how her terrible doom was being wrought
out. jonathan and i have been working day and night since professor van
helsing saw us. he is gone to whitby to get more information, and he
will be here to-morrow to help us. we need have no secrets amongst us;
working together and with absolute trust, we can surely be stronger than
if some of us were in the dark.” she looked at me so appealingly, and at
the same time manifested such courage and resolution in her bearing,
that i gave in at once to her wishes. “you shall,” i said, “do as you
like in the matter. god forgive me if i do wrong! there are terrible
things yet to learn of; but if you have so far travelled on the road to
poor lucy’s death, you will not be content, i know, to remain in the
dark. nay, the end--the very end--may give you a gleam of peace. come,
there is dinner. we must keep one another strong for what is before us;
we have a cruel and dreadful task. when you have eaten you shall learn
the rest, and i shall answer any questions you ask--if there be anything
which you do not understand, though it was apparent to us who were
present.”


_mina harker’s journal._

_29 september._--after dinner i came with dr. seward to his study. he
brought back the phonograph from my room, and i took my typewriter. he
placed me in a comfortable chair, and arranged the phonograph so that i
could touch it without getting up, and showed me how to stop it in case
i should want to pause. then he very thoughtfully took a chair, with his
back to me, so that i might be as free as possible, and began to read. i
put the forked metal to my ears and listened.

when the terrible story of lucy’s death, and--and all that followed, was
done, i lay back in my chair powerless. fortunately i am not of a
fainting disposition. when dr. seward saw me he jumped up with a
horrified exclamation, and hurriedly taking a case-bottle from a
cupboard, gave me some brandy, which in a few minutes somewhat restored
me. my brain was all in a whirl, and only that there came through all
the multitude of horrors, the holy ray of light that my dear, dear lucy
was at last at peace, i do not think i could have borne it without
making a scene. it is all so wild, and mysterious, and strange that if i
had not known jonathan’s experience in transylvania i could not have
believed. as it was, i didn’t know what to believe, and so got out of my
difficulty by attending to something else. i took the cover off my
typewriter, and said to dr. seward:--

“let me write this all out now. we must be ready for dr. van helsing
when he comes. i have sent a telegram to jonathan to come on here when
he arrives in london from whitby. in this matter dates are everything,
and i think that if we get all our material ready, and have every item
put in chronological order, we shall have done much. you tell me that
lord godalming and mr. morris are coming too. let us be able to tell him
when they come.” he accordingly set the phonograph at a slow pace, and i
began to typewrite from the beginning of the seventh cylinder. i used
manifold, and so took three copies of the diary, just as i had done with
all the rest. it was late when i got through, but dr. seward went about
his work of going his round of the patients; when he had finished he
came back and sat near me, reading, so that i did not feel too lonely
whilst i worked. how good and thoughtful he is; the world seems full of
good men--even if there _are_ monsters in it. before i left him i
remembered what jonathan put in his diary of the professor’s
perturbation at reading something in an evening paper at the station at
exeter; so, seeing that dr. seward keeps his newspapers, i borrowed the
files of “the westminster gazette” and “the pall mall gazette,” and took
them to my room. i remember how much “the dailygraph” and “the whitby
gazette,” of which i had made cuttings, helped us to understand the
terrible events at whitby when count dracula landed, so i shall look
through the evening papers since then, and perhaps i shall get some new
light. i am not sleepy, and the work will help to keep me quiet.


_dr. seward’s diary._

_30 september._--mr. harker arrived at nine o’clock. he had got his
wife’s wire just before starting. he is uncommonly clever, if one can
judge from his face, and full of energy. if this journal be true--and
judging by one’s own wonderful experiences, it must be--he is also a man
of great nerve. that going down to the vault a second time was a
remarkable piece of daring. after reading his account of it i was
prepared to meet a good specimen of manhood, but hardly the quiet,
business-like gentleman who came here to-day.

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--after lunch harker and his wife went back to their own room,
and as i passed a while ago i heard the click of the typewriter. they
are hard at it. mrs. harker says that they are knitting together in
chronological order every scrap of evidence they have. harker has got
the letters between the consignee of the boxes at whitby and the
carriers in london who took charge of them. he is now reading his wife’s
typescript of my diary. i wonder what they make out of it. here it
is....

     strange that it never struck me that the very next house might be
     the count’s hiding-place! goodness knows that we had enough clues
     from the conduct of the patient renfield! the bundle of letters
     relating to the purchase of the house were with the typescript. oh,
     if we had only had them earlier we might have saved poor lucy!
     stop; that way madness lies! harker has gone back, and is again
     collating his material. he says that by dinner-time they will be
     able to show a whole connected narrative. he thinks that in the
     meantime i should see renfield, as hitherto he has been a sort of
     index to the coming and going of the count. i hardly see this yet,
     but when i get at the dates i suppose i shall. what a good thing
     that mrs. harker put my cylinders into type! we never could have
     found the dates otherwise....

     i found renfield sitting placidly in his room with his hands
     folded, smiling benignly. at the moment he seemed as sane as any
     one i ever saw. i sat down and talked with him on a lot of
     subjects, all of which he treated naturally. he then, of his own
     accord, spoke of going home, a subject he has never mentioned to my
     knowledge during his sojourn here. in fact, he spoke quite
     confidently of getting his discharge at once. i believe that, had i
     not had the chat with harker and read the letters and the dates of
     his outbursts, i should have been prepared to sign for him after a
     brief time of observation. as it is, i am darkly suspicious. all
     those outbreaks were in some way linked with the proximity of the
     count. what then does this absolute content mean? can it be that
     his instinct is satisfied as to the vampire’s ultimate triumph?
     stay; he is himself zoöphagous, and in his wild ravings outside the
     chapel door of the deserted house he always spoke of “master.” this
     all seems confirmation of our idea. however, after a while i came
     away; my friend is just a little too sane at present to make it
     safe to probe him too deep with questions. he might begin to think,
     and then--! so i came away. i mistrust these quiet moods of his; so
     i have given the attendant a hint to look closely after him, and to
     have a strait-waistcoat ready in case of need.


_jonathan harker’s journal._

_29 september, in train to london._--when i received mr. billington’s
courteous message that he would give me any information in his power i
thought it best to go down to whitby and make, on the spot, such
inquiries as i wanted. it was now my object to trace that horrid cargo
of the count’s to its place in london. later, we may be able to deal
with it. billington junior, a nice lad, met me at the station, and
brought me to his father’s house, where they had decided that i must
stay the night. they are hospitable, with true yorkshire hospitality:
give a guest everything, and leave him free to do as he likes. they all
knew that i was busy, and that my stay was short, and mr. billington had
ready in his office all the papers concerning the consignment of boxes.
it gave me almost a turn to see again one of the letters which i had
seen on the count’s table before i knew of his diabolical plans.
everything had been carefully thought out, and done systematically and
with precision. he seemed to have been prepared for every obstacle which
might be placed by accident in the way of his intentions being carried
out. to use an americanism, he had “taken no chances,” and the absolute
accuracy with which his instructions were fulfilled, was simply the
logical result of his care. i saw the invoice, and took note of it:
“fifty cases of common earth, to be used for experimental purposes.”
also the copy of letter to carter paterson, and their reply; of both of
these i got copies. this was all the information mr. billington could
give me, so i went down to the port and saw the coastguards, the customs
officers and the harbour-master. they had all something to say of the
strange entry of the ship, which is already taking its place in local
tradition; but no one could add to the simple description “fifty cases
of common earth.” i then saw the station-master, who kindly put me in
communication with the men who had actually received the boxes. their
tally was exact with the list, and they had nothing to add except that
the boxes were “main and mortal heavy,” and that shifting them was dry
work. one of them added that it was hard lines that there wasn’t any
gentleman “such-like as yourself, squire,” to show some sort of
appreciation of their efforts in a liquid form; another put in a rider
that the thirst then generated was such that even the time which had
elapsed had not completely allayed it. needless to add, i took care
before leaving to lift, for ever and adequately, this source of
reproach.

       *       *       *       *       *

_30 september._--the station-master was good enough to give me a line to
his old companion the station-master at king’s cross, so that when i
arrived there in the morning i was able to ask him about the arrival of
the boxes. he, too, put me at once in communication with the proper
officials, and i saw that their tally was correct with the original
invoice. the opportunities of acquiring an abnormal thirst had been here
limited; a noble use of them had, however, been made, and again i was
compelled to deal with the result in an _ex post facto_ manner.

from thence i went on to carter paterson’s central office, where i met
with the utmost courtesy. they looked up the transaction in their
day-book and letter-book, and at once telephoned to their king’s cross
office for more details. by good fortune, the men who did the teaming
were waiting for work, and the official at once sent them over, sending
also by one of them the way-bill and all the papers connected with the
delivery of the boxes at carfax. here again i found the tally agreeing
exactly; the carriers’ men were able to supplement the paucity of the
written words with a few details. these were, i shortly found, connected
almost solely with the dusty nature of the job, and of the consequent
thirst engendered in the operators. on my affording an opportunity,
through the medium of the currency of the realm, of the allaying, at a
later period, this beneficial evil, one of the men remarked:--

“that ’ere ’ouse, guv’nor, is the rummiest i ever was in. blyme! but it
ain’t been touched sence a hundred years. there was dust that thick in
the place that you might have slep’ on it without ’urtin’ of yer bones;
an’ the place was that neglected that yer might ’ave smelled ole
jerusalem in it. but the ole chapel--that took the cike, that did! me
and my mate, we thort we wouldn’t never git out quick enough. lor’, i
wouldn’t take less nor a quid a moment to stay there arter dark.”

having been in the house, i could well believe him; but if he knew what
i know, he would, i think, have raised his terms.

of one thing i am now satisfied: that _all_ the boxes which arrived at
whitby from varna in the _demeter_ were safely deposited in the old
chapel at carfax. there should be fifty of them there, unless any have
since been removed--as from dr. seward’s diary i fear.

i shall try to see the carter who took away the boxes from carfax when
renfield attacked them. by following up this clue we may learn a good
deal.

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--mina and i have worked all day, and we have put all the papers
into order.


_mina harker’s journal_

_30 september._--i am so glad that i hardly know how to contain myself.
it is, i suppose, the reaction from the haunting fear which i have had:
that this terrible affair and the reopening of his old wound might act
detrimentally on jonathan. i saw him leave for whitby with as brave a
face as i could, but i was sick with apprehension. the effort has,
however, done him good. he was never so resolute, never so strong, never
so full of volcanic energy, as at present. it is just as that dear, good
professor van helsing said: he is true grit, and he improves under
strain that would kill a weaker nature. he came back full of life and
hope and determination; we have got everything in order for to-night. i
feel myself quite wild with excitement. i suppose one ought to pity any
thing so hunted as is the count. that is just it: this thing is not
human--not even beast. to read dr. seward’s account of poor lucy’s
death, and what followed, is enough to dry up the springs of pity in
one’s heart.

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--lord godalming and mr. morris arrived earlier than we
expected. dr. seward was out on business, and had taken jonathan with
him, so i had to see them. it was to me a painful meeting, for it
brought back all poor dear lucy’s hopes of only a few months ago. of
course they had heard lucy speak of me, and it seemed that dr. van
helsing, too, has been quite “blowing my trumpet,” as mr. morris
expressed it. poor fellows, neither of them is aware that i know all
about the proposals they made to lucy. they did not quite know what to
say or do, as they were ignorant of the amount of my knowledge; so they
had to keep on neutral subjects. however, i thought the matter over, and
came to the conclusion that the best thing i could do would be to post
them in affairs right up to date. i knew from dr. seward’s diary that
they had been at lucy’s death--her real death--and that i need not fear
to betray any secret before the time. so i told them, as well as i
could, that i had read all the papers and diaries, and that my husband
and i, having typewritten them, had just finished putting them in order.
i gave them each a copy to read in the library. when lord godalming got
his and turned it over--it does make a pretty good pile--he said:--

“did you write all this, mrs. harker?”

i nodded, and he went on:--

“i don’t quite see the drift of it; but you people are all so good and
kind, and have been working so earnestly and so energetically, that all
i can do is to accept your ideas blindfold and try to help you. i have
had one lesson already in accepting facts that should make a man humble
to the last hour of his life. besides, i know you loved my poor lucy--”
here he turned away and covered his face with his hands. i could hear
the tears in his voice. mr. morris, with instinctive delicacy, just laid
a hand for a moment on his shoulder, and then walked quietly out of the
room. i suppose there is something in woman’s nature that makes a man
free to break down before her and express his feelings on the tender or
emotional side without feeling it derogatory to his manhood; for when
lord godalming found himself alone with me he sat down on the sofa and
gave way utterly and openly. i sat down beside him and took his hand. i
hope he didn’t think it forward of me, and that if he ever thinks of it
afterwards he never will have such a thought. there i wrong him; i
_know_ he never will--he is too true a gentleman. i said to him, for i
could see that his heart was breaking:--

“i loved dear lucy, and i know what she was to you, and what you were to
her. she and i were like sisters; and now she is gone, will you not let
me be like a sister to you in your trouble? i know what sorrows you have
had, though i cannot measure the depth of them. if sympathy and pity can
help in your affliction, won’t you let me be of some little service--for
lucy’s sake?”

in an instant the poor dear fellow was overwhelmed with grief. it seemed
to me that all that he had of late been suffering in silence found a
vent at once. he grew quite hysterical, and raising his open hands, beat
his palms together in a perfect agony of grief. he stood up and then sat
down again, and the tears rained down his cheeks. i felt an infinite
pity for him, and opened my arms unthinkingly. with a sob he laid his
head on my shoulder and cried like a wearied child, whilst he shook with
emotion.

we women have something of the mother in us that makes us rise above
smaller matters when the mother-spirit is invoked; i felt this big
sorrowing man’s head resting on me, as though it were that of the baby
that some day may lie on my bosom, and i stroked his hair as though he
were my own child. i never thought at the time how strange it all was.

after a little bit his sobs ceased, and he raised himself with an
apology, though he made no disguise of his emotion. he told me that for
days and nights past--weary days and sleepless nights--he had been
unable to speak with any one, as a man must speak in his time of
sorrow. there was no woman whose sympathy could be given to him, or with
whom, owing to the terrible circumstance with which his sorrow was
surrounded, he could speak freely. “i know now how i suffered,” he said,
as he dried his eyes, “but i do not know even yet--and none other can
ever know--how much your sweet sympathy has been to me to-day. i shall
know better in time; and believe me that, though i am not ungrateful
now, my gratitude will grow with my understanding. you will let me be
like a brother, will you not, for all our lives--for dear lucy’s sake?”

“for dear lucy’s sake,” i said as we clasped hands. “ay, and for your
own sake,” he added, “for if a man’s esteem and gratitude are ever worth
the winning, you have won mine to-day. if ever the future should bring
to you a time when you need a man’s help, believe me, you will not call
in vain. god grant that no such time may ever come to you to break the
sunshine of your life; but if it should ever come, promise me that you
will let me know.” he was so earnest, and his sorrow was so fresh, that
i felt it would comfort him, so i said:--

“i promise.”

as i came along the corridor i saw mr. morris looking out of a window.
he turned as he heard my footsteps. “how is art?” he said. then noticing
my red eyes, he went on: “ah, i see you have been comforting him. poor
old fellow! he needs it. no one but a woman can help a man when he is in
trouble of the heart; and he had no one to comfort him.”

he bore his own trouble so bravely that my heart bled for him. i saw the
manuscript in his hand, and i knew that when he read it he would realise
how much i knew; so i said to him:--

“i wish i could comfort all who suffer from the heart. will you let me
be your friend, and will you come to me for comfort if you need it? you
will know, later on, why i speak.” he saw that i was in earnest, and
stooping, took my hand, and raising it to his lips, kissed it. it seemed
but poor comfort to so brave and unselfish a soul, and impulsively i
bent over and kissed him. the tears rose in his eyes, and there was a
momentary choking in his throat; he said quite calmly:--

“little girl, you will never regret that true-hearted kindness, so long
as ever you live!” then he went into the study to his friend.

“little girl!”--the very words he had used to lucy, and oh, but he
proved himself a friend!




chapter xviii

dr. seward’s diary


_30 september._--i got home at five o’clock, and found that godalming
and morris had not only arrived, but had already studied the transcript
of the various diaries and letters which harker and his wonderful wife
had made and arranged. harker had not yet returned from his visit to the
carriers’ men, of whom dr. hennessey had written to me. mrs. harker gave
us a cup of tea, and i can honestly say that, for the first time since i
have lived in it, this old house seemed like _home_. when we had
finished, mrs. harker said:--

“dr. seward, may i ask a favour? i want to see your patient, mr.
renfield. do let me see him. what you have said of him in your diary
interests me so much!” she looked so appealing and so pretty that i
could not refuse her, and there was no possible reason why i should; so
i took her with me. when i went into the room, i told the man that a
lady would like to see him; to which he simply answered: “why?”

“she is going through the house, and wants to see every one in it,” i
answered. “oh, very well,” he said; “let her come in, by all means; but
just wait a minute till i tidy up the place.” his method of tidying was
peculiar: he simply swallowed all the flies and spiders in the boxes
before i could stop him. it was quite evident that he feared, or was
jealous of, some interference. when he had got through his disgusting
task, he said cheerfully: “let the lady come in,” and sat down on the
edge of his bed with his head down, but with his eyelids raised so that
he could see her as she entered. for a moment i thought that he might
have some homicidal intent; i remembered how quiet he had been just
before he attacked me in my own study, and i took care to stand where i
could seize him at once if he attempted to make a spring at her. she
came into the room with an easy gracefulness which would at once command
the respect of any lunatic--for easiness is one of the qualities mad
people most respect. she walked over to him, smiling pleasantly, and
held out her hand.

“good-evening, mr. renfield,” said she. “you see, i know you, for dr.
seward has told me of you.” he made no immediate reply, but eyed her all
over intently with a set frown on his face. this look gave way to one
of wonder, which merged in doubt; then, to my intense astonishment, he
said:--

“you’re not the girl the doctor wanted to marry, are you? you can’t be,
you know, for she’s dead.” mrs. harker smiled sweetly as she replied:--

“oh no! i have a husband of my own, to whom i was married before i ever
saw dr. seward, or he me. i am mrs. harker.”

“then what are you doing here?”

“my husband and i are staying on a visit with dr. seward.”

“then don’t stay.”

“but why not?” i thought that this style of conversation might not be
pleasant to mrs. harker, any more than it was to me, so i joined in:--

“how did you know i wanted to marry any one?” his reply was simply
contemptuous, given in a pause in which he turned his eyes from mrs.
harker to me, instantly turning them back again:--

“what an asinine question!”

“i don’t see that at all, mr. renfield,” said mrs. harker, at once
championing me. he replied to her with as much courtesy and respect as
he had shown contempt to me:--

“you will, of course, understand, mrs. harker, that when a man is so
loved and honoured as our host is, everything regarding him is of
interest in our little community. dr. seward is loved not only by his
household and his friends, but even by his patients, who, being some of
them hardly in mental equilibrium, are apt to distort causes and
effects. since i myself have been an inmate of a lunatic asylum, i
cannot but notice that the sophistic tendencies of some of its inmates
lean towards the errors of _non causa_ and _ignoratio elenchi_.” i
positively opened my eyes at this new development. here was my own pet
lunatic--the most pronounced of his type that i had ever met
with--talking elemental philosophy, and with the manner of a polished
gentleman. i wonder if it was mrs. harker’s presence which had touched
some chord in his memory. if this new phase was spontaneous, or in any
way due to her unconscious influence, she must have some rare gift or
power.

we continued to talk for some time; and, seeing that he was seemingly
quite reasonable, she ventured, looking at me questioningly as she
began, to lead him to his favourite topic. i was again astonished, for
he addressed himself to the question with the impartiality of the
completest sanity; he even took himself as an example when he mentioned
certain things.

“why, i myself am an instance of a man who had a strange belief. indeed,
it was no wonder that my friends were alarmed, and insisted on my being
put under control. i used to fancy that life was a positive and
perpetual entity, and that by consuming a multitude of live things, no
matter how low in the scale of creation, one might indefinitely prolong
life. at times i held the belief so strongly that i actually tried to
take human life. the doctor here will bear me out that on one occasion i
tried to kill him for the purpose of strengthening my vital powers by
the assimilation with my own body of his life through the medium of his
blood--relying, of course, upon the scriptural phrase, ‘for the blood is
the life.’ though, indeed, the vendor of a certain nostrum has
vulgarised the truism to the very point of contempt. isn’t that true,
doctor?” i nodded assent, for i was so amazed that i hardly knew what to
either think or say; it was hard to imagine that i had seen him eat up
his spiders and flies not five minutes before. looking at my watch, i
saw that i should go to the station to meet van helsing, so i told mrs.
harker that it was time to leave. she came at once, after saying
pleasantly to mr. renfield: “good-bye, and i hope i may see you often,
under auspices pleasanter to yourself,” to which, to my astonishment, he
replied:--

“good-bye, my dear. i pray god i may never see your sweet face again.
may he bless and keep you!”

when i went to the station to meet van helsing i left the boys behind
me. poor art seemed more cheerful than he has been since lucy first took
ill, and quincey is more like his own bright self than he has been for
many a long day.

van helsing stepped from the carriage with the eager nimbleness of a
boy. he saw me at once, and rushed up to me, saying:--

“ah, friend john, how goes all? well? so! i have been busy, for i come
here to stay if need be. all affairs are settled with me, and i have
much to tell. madam mina is with you? yes. and her so fine husband? and
arthur and my friend quincey, they are with you, too? good!”

as i drove to the house i told him of what had passed, and of how my own
diary had come to be of some use through mrs. harker’s suggestion; at
which the professor interrupted me:--

“ah, that wonderful madam mina! she has man’s brain--a brain that a man
should have were he much gifted--and a woman’s heart. the good god
fashioned her for a purpose, believe me, when he made that so good
combination. friend john, up to now fortune has made that woman of help
to us; after to-night she must not have to do with this so terrible
affair. it is not good that she run a risk so great. we men are
determined--nay, are we not pledged?--to destroy this monster; but it is
no part for a woman. even if she be not harmed, her heart may fail her
in so much and so many horrors; and hereafter she may suffer--both in
waking, from her nerves, and in sleep, from her dreams. and, besides,
she is young woman and not so long married; there may be other things to
think of some time, if not now. you tell me she has wrote all, then she
must consult with us; but to-morrow she say good-bye to this work, and
we go alone.” i agreed heartily with him, and then i told him what we
had found in his absence: that the house which dracula had bought was
the very next one to my own. he was amazed, and a great concern seemed
to come on him. “oh that we had known it before!” he said, “for then we
might have reached him in time to save poor lucy. however, ‘the milk
that is spilt cries not out afterwards,’ as you say. we shall not think
of that, but go on our way to the end.” then he fell into a silence that
lasted till we entered my own gateway. before we went to prepare for
dinner he said to mrs. harker:--

“i am told, madam mina, by my friend john that you and your husband have
put up in exact order all things that have been, up to this moment.”

“not up to this moment, professor,” she said impulsively, “but up to
this morning.”

“but why not up to now? we have seen hitherto how good light all the
little things have made. we have told our secrets, and yet no one who
has told is the worse for it.”

mrs. harker began to blush, and taking a paper from her pockets, she
said:--

“dr. van helsing, will you read this, and tell me if it must go in. it
is my record of to-day. i too have seen the need of putting down at
present everything, however trivial; but there is little in this except
what is personal. must it go in?” the professor read it over gravely,
and handed it back, saying:--

“it need not go in if you do not wish it; but i pray that it may. it can
but make your husband love you the more, and all us, your friends, more
honour you--as well as more esteem and love.” she took it back with
another blush and a bright smile.

and so now, up to this very hour, all the records we have are complete
and in order. the professor took away one copy to study after dinner,
and before our meeting, which is fixed for nine o’clock. the rest of us
have already read everything; so when we meet in the study we shall all
be informed as to facts, and can arrange our plan of battle with this
terrible and mysterious enemy.


_mina harker’s journal._

_30 september._--when we met in dr. seward’s study two hours after
dinner, which had been at six o’clock, we unconsciously formed a sort of
board or committee. professor van helsing took the head of the table, to
which dr. seward motioned him as he came into the room. he made me sit
next to him on his right, and asked me to act as secretary; jonathan sat
next to me. opposite us were lord godalming, dr. seward, and mr.
morris--lord godalming being next the professor, and dr. seward in the
centre. the professor said:--

“i may, i suppose, take it that we are all acquainted with the facts
that are in these papers.” we all expressed assent, and he went on:--

“then it were, i think good that i tell you something of the kind of
enemy with which we have to deal. i shall then make known to you
something of the history of this man, which has been ascertained for me.
so we then can discuss how we shall act, and can take our measure
according.

“there are such beings as vampires; some of us have evidence that they
exist. even had we not the proof of our own unhappy experience, the
teachings and the records of the past give proof enough for sane
peoples. i admit that at the first i was sceptic. were it not that
through long years i have train myself to keep an open mind, i could not
have believe until such time as that fact thunder on my ear. ‘see! see!
i prove; i prove.’ alas! had i known at the first what now i know--nay,
had i even guess at him--one so precious life had been spared to many of
us who did love her. but that is gone; and we must so work, that other
poor souls perish not, whilst we can save. the _nosferatu_ do not die
like the bee when he sting once. he is only stronger; and being
stronger, have yet more power to work evil. this vampire which is
amongst us is of himself so strong in person as twenty men; he is of
cunning more than mortal, for his cunning be the growth of ages; he have
still the aids of necromancy, which is, as his etymology imply, the
divination by the dead, and all the dead that he can come nigh to are
for him at command; he is brute, and more than brute; he is devil in
callous, and the heart of him is not; he can, within limitations, appear
at will when, and where, and in any of the forms that are to him; he
can, within his range, direct the elements; the storm, the fog, the
thunder; he can command all the meaner things: the rat, and the owl, and
the bat--the moth, and the fox, and the wolf; he can grow and become
small; and he can at times vanish and come unknown. how then are we to
begin our strike to destroy him? how shall we find his where; and having
found it, how can we destroy? my friends, this is much; it is a terrible
task that we undertake, and there may be consequence to make the brave
shudder. for if we fail in this our fight he must surely win; and then
where end we? life is nothings; i heed him not. but to fail here, is not
mere life or death. it is that we become as him; that we henceforward
become foul things of the night like him--without heart or conscience,
preying on the bodies and the souls of those we love best. to us for
ever are the gates of heaven shut; for who shall open them to us again?
we go on for all time abhorred by all; a blot on the face of god’s
sunshine; an arrow in the side of him who died for man. but we are face
to face with duty; and in such case must we shrink? for me, i say, no;
but then i am old, and life, with his sunshine, his fair places, his
song of birds, his music and his love, lie far behind. you others are
young. some have seen sorrow; but there are fair days yet in store. what
say you?”

whilst he was speaking, jonathan had taken my hand. i feared, oh so
much, that the appalling nature of our danger was overcoming him when i
saw his hand stretch out; but it was life to me to feel its touch--so
strong, so self-reliant, so resolute. a brave man’s hand can speak for
itself; it does not even need a woman’s love to hear its music.

when the professor had done speaking my husband looked in my eyes, and i
in his; there was no need for speaking between us.

“i answer for mina and myself,” he said.

“count me in, professor,” said mr. quincey morris, laconically as usual.

“i am with you,” said lord godalming, “for lucy’s sake, if for no other
reason.”

dr. seward simply nodded. the professor stood up and, after laying his
golden crucifix on the table, held out his hand on either side. i took
his right hand, and lord godalming his left; jonathan held my right with
his left and stretched across to mr. morris. so as we all took hands our
solemn compact was made. i felt my heart icy cold, but it did not even
occur to me to draw back. we resumed our places, and dr. van helsing
went on with a sort of cheerfulness which showed that the serious work
had begun. it was to be taken as gravely, and in as businesslike a way,
as any other transaction of life:--

“well, you know what we have to contend against; but we, too, are not
without strength. we have on our side power of combination--a power
denied to the vampire kind; we have sources of science; we are free to
act and think; and the hours of the day and the night are ours equally.
in fact, so far as our powers extend, they are unfettered, and we are
free to use them. we have self-devotion in a cause, and an end to
achieve which is not a selfish one. these things are much.

“now let us see how far the general powers arrayed against us are
restrict, and how the individual cannot. in fine, let us consider the
limitations of the vampire in general, and of this one in particular.

“all we have to go upon are traditions and superstitions. these do not
at the first appear much, when the matter is one of life and death--nay
of more than either life or death. yet must we be satisfied; in the
first place because we have to be--no other means is at our control--and
secondly, because, after all, these things--tradition and
superstition--are everything. does not the belief in vampires rest for
others--though not, alas! for us--on them? a year ago which of us would
have received such a possibility, in the midst of our scientific,
sceptical, matter-of-fact nineteenth century? we even scouted a belief
that we saw justified under our very eyes. take it, then, that the
vampire, and the belief in his limitations and his cure, rest for the
moment on the same base. for, let me tell you, he is known everywhere
that men have been. in old greece, in old rome; he flourish in germany
all over, in france, in india, even in the chernosese; and in china, so
far from us in all ways, there even is he, and the peoples fear him at
this day. he have follow the wake of the berserker icelander, the
devil-begotten hun, the slav, the saxon, the magyar. so far, then, we
have all we may act upon; and let me tell you that very much of the
beliefs are justified by what we have seen in our own so unhappy
experience. the vampire live on, and cannot die by mere passing of the
time; he can flourish when that he can fatten on the blood of the
living. even more, we have seen amongst us that he can even grow
younger; that his vital faculties grow strenuous, and seem as though
they refresh themselves when his special pabulum is plenty. but he
cannot flourish without this diet; he eat not as others. even friend
jonathan, who lived with him for weeks, did never see him to eat, never!
he throws no shadow; he make in the mirror no reflect, as again
jonathan observe. he has the strength of many of his hand--witness again
jonathan when he shut the door against the wolfs, and when he help him
from the diligence too. he can transform himself to wolf, as we gather
from the ship arrival in whitby, when he tear open the dog; he can be as
bat, as madam mina saw him on the window at whitby, and as friend john
saw him fly from this so near house, and as my friend quincey saw him at
the window of miss lucy. he can come in mist which he create--that noble
ship’s captain proved him of this; but, from what we know, the distance
he can make this mist is limited, and it can only be round himself. he
come on moonlight rays as elemental dust--as again jonathan saw those
sisters in the castle of dracula. he become so small--we ourselves saw
miss lucy, ere she was at peace, slip through a hairbreadth space at the
tomb door. he can, when once he find his way, come out from anything or
into anything, no matter how close it be bound or even fused up with
fire--solder you call it. he can see in the dark--no small power this,
in a world which is one half shut from the light. ah, but hear me
through. he can do all these things, yet he is not free. nay; he is even
more prisoner than the slave of the galley, than the madman in his cell.
he cannot go where he lists; he who is not of nature has yet to obey
some of nature’s laws--why we know not. he may not enter anywhere at the
first, unless there be some one of the household who bid him to come;
though afterwards he can come as he please. his power ceases, as does
that of all evil things, at the coming of the day. only at certain times
can he have limited freedom. if he be not at the place whither he is
bound, he can only change himself at noon or at exact sunrise or sunset.
these things are we told, and in this record of ours we have proof by
inference. thus, whereas he can do as he will within his limit, when he
have his earth-home, his coffin-home, his hell-home, the place
unhallowed, as we saw when he went to the grave of the suicide at
whitby; still at other time he can only change when the time come. it is
said, too, that he can only pass running water at the slack or the flood
of the tide. then there are things which so afflict him that he has no
power, as the garlic that we know of; and as for things sacred, as this
symbol, my crucifix, that was amongst us even now when we resolve, to
them he is nothing, but in their presence he take his place far off and
silent with respect. there are others, too, which i shall tell you of,
lest in our seeking we may need them. the branch of wild rose on his
coffin keep him that he move not from it; a sacred bullet fired into the
coffin kill him so that he be true dead; and as for the stake through
him, we know already of its peace; or the cut-off head that giveth rest.
we have seen it with our eyes.

“thus when we find the habitation of this man-that-was, we can confine
him to his coffin and destroy him, if we obey what we know. but he is
clever. i have asked my friend arminius, of buda-pesth university, to
make his record; and, from all the means that are, he tell me of what he
has been. he must, indeed, have been that voivode dracula who won his
name against the turk, over the great river on the very frontier of
turkey-land. if it be so, then was he no common man; for in that time,
and for centuries after, he was spoken of as the cleverest and the most
cunning, as well as the bravest of the sons of the ‘land beyond the
forest.’ that mighty brain and that iron resolution went with him to his
grave, and are even now arrayed against us. the draculas were, says
arminius, a great and noble race, though now and again were scions who
were held by their coevals to have had dealings with the evil one. they
learned his secrets in the scholomance, amongst the mountains over lake
hermanstadt, where the devil claims the tenth scholar as his due. in the
records are such words as ‘stregoica’--witch, ‘ordog,’ and
‘pokol’--satan and hell; and in one manuscript this very dracula is
spoken of as ‘wampyr,’ which we all understand too well. there have been
from the loins of this very one great men and good women, and their
graves make sacred the earth where alone this foulness can dwell. for it
is not the least of its terrors that this evil thing is rooted deep in
all good; in soil barren of holy memories it cannot rest.”

whilst they were talking mr. morris was looking steadily at the window,
and he now got up quietly, and went out of the room. there was a little
pause, and then the professor went on:--

“and now we must settle what we do. we have here much data, and we must
proceed to lay out our campaign. we know from the inquiry of jonathan
that from the castle to whitby came fifty boxes of earth, all of which
were delivered at carfax; we also know that at least some of these boxes
have been removed. it seems to me, that our first step should be to
ascertain whether all the rest remain in the house beyond that wall
where we look to-day; or whether any more have been removed. if the
latter, we must trace----”

here we were interrupted in a very startling way. outside the house came
the sound of a pistol-shot; the glass of the window was shattered with a
bullet, which, ricochetting from the top of the embrasure, struck the
far wall of the room. i am afraid i am at heart a coward, for i shrieked
out. the men all jumped to their feet; lord godalming flew over to the
window and threw up the sash. as he did so we heard mr. morris’s voice
without:--

“sorry! i fear i have alarmed you. i shall come in and tell you about
it.” a minute later he came in and said:--

“it was an idiotic thing of me to do, and i ask your pardon, mrs.
harker, most sincerely; i fear i must have frightened you terribly. but
the fact is that whilst the professor was talking there came a big bat
and sat on the window-sill. i have got such a horror of the damned
brutes from recent events that i cannot stand them, and i went out to
have a shot, as i have been doing of late of evenings, whenever i have
seen one. you used to laugh at me for it then, art.”

“did you hit it?” asked dr. van helsing.

“i don’t know; i fancy not, for it flew away into the wood.” without
saying any more he took his seat, and the professor began to resume his
statement:--

“we must trace each of these boxes; and when we are ready, we must
either capture or kill this monster in his lair; or we must, so to
speak, sterilise the earth, so that no more he can seek safety in it.
thus in the end we may find him in his form of man between the hours of
noon and sunset, and so engage with him when he is at his most weak.

“and now for you, madam mina, this night is the end until all be well.
you are too precious to us to have such risk. when we part to-night, you
no more must question. we shall tell you all in good time. we are men
and are able to bear; but you must be our star and our hope, and we
shall act all the more free that you are not in the danger, such as we
are.”

all the men, even jonathan, seemed relieved; but it did not seem to me
good that they should brave danger and, perhaps, lessen their
safety--strength being the best safety--through care of me; but their
minds were made up, and, though it was a bitter pill for me to swallow,
i could say nothing, save to accept their chivalrous care of me.

mr. morris resumed the discussion:--

“as there is no time to lose, i vote we have a look at his house right
now. time is everything with him; and swift action on our part may save
another victim.”

i own that my heart began to fail me when the time for action came so
close, but i did not say anything, for i had a greater fear that if i
appeared as a drag or a hindrance to their work, they might even leave
me out of their counsels altogether. they have now gone off to carfax,
with means to get into the house.

manlike, they had told me to go to bed and sleep; as if a woman can
sleep when those she loves are in danger! i shall lie down and pretend
to sleep, lest jonathan have added anxiety about me when he returns.


_dr. seward’s diary._

_1 october, 4 a. m._--just as we were about to leave the house, an
urgent message was brought to me from renfield to know if i would see
him at once, as he had something of the utmost importance to say to me.
i told the messenger to say that i would attend to his wishes in the
morning; i was busy just at the moment. the attendant added:--

“he seems very importunate, sir. i have never seen him so eager. i don’t
know but what, if you don’t see him soon, he will have one of his
violent fits.” i knew the man would not have said this without some
cause, so i said: “all right; i’ll go now”; and i asked the others to
wait a few minutes for me, as i had to go and see my “patient.”

“take me with you, friend john,” said the professor. “his case in your
diary interest me much, and it had bearing, too, now and again on _our_
case. i should much like to see him, and especial when his mind is
disturbed.”

“may i come also?” asked lord godalming.

“me too?” said quincey morris. “may i come?” said harker. i nodded, and
we all went down the passage together.

we found him in a state of considerable excitement, but far more
rational in his speech and manner than i had ever seen him. there was an
unusual understanding of himself, which was unlike anything i had ever
met with in a lunatic; and he took it for granted that his reasons would
prevail with others entirely sane. we all four went into the room, but
none of the others at first said anything. his request was that i would
at once release him from the asylum and send him home. this he backed up
with arguments regarding his complete recovery, and adduced his own
existing sanity. “i appeal to your friends,” he said, “they will,
perhaps, not mind sitting in judgment on my case. by the way, you have
not introduced me.” i was so much astonished, that the oddness of
introducing a madman in an asylum did not strike me at the moment; and,
besides, there was a certain dignity in the man’s manner, so much of
the habit of equality, that i at once made the introduction: “lord
godalming; professor van helsing; mr. quincey morris, of texas; mr.
renfield.” he shook hands with each of them, saying in turn:--

“lord godalming, i had the honour of seconding your father at the
windham; i grieve to know, by your holding the title, that he is no
more. he was a man loved and honoured by all who knew him; and in his
youth was, i have heard, the inventor of a burnt rum punch, much
patronised on derby night. mr. morris, you should be proud of your great
state. its reception into the union was a precedent which may have
far-reaching effects hereafter, when the pole and the tropics may hold
alliance to the stars and stripes. the power of treaty may yet prove a
vast engine of enlargement, when the monroe doctrine takes its true
place as a political fable. what shall any man say of his pleasure at
meeting van helsing? sir, i make no apology for dropping all forms of
conventional prefix. when an individual has revolutionised therapeutics
by his discovery of the continuous evolution of brain-matter,
conventional forms are unfitting, since they would seem to limit him to
one of a class. you, gentlemen, who by nationality, by heredity, or by
the possession of natural gifts, are fitted to hold your respective
places in the moving world, i take to witness that i am as sane as at
least the majority of men who are in full possession of their liberties.
and i am sure that you, dr. seward, humanitarian and medico-jurist as
well as scientist, will deem it a moral duty to deal with me as one to
be considered as under exceptional circumstances.” he made this last
appeal with a courtly air of conviction which was not without its own
charm.

i think we were all staggered. for my own part, i was under the
conviction, despite my knowledge of the man’s character and history,
that his reason had been restored; and i felt under a strong impulse to
tell him that i was satisfied as to his sanity, and would see about the
necessary formalities for his release in the morning. i thought it
better to wait, however, before making so grave a statement, for of old
i knew the sudden changes to which this particular patient was liable.
so i contented myself with making a general statement that he appeared
to be improving very rapidly; that i would have a longer chat with him
in the morning, and would then see what i could do in the direction of
meeting his wishes. this did not at all satisfy him, for he said
quickly:--

“but i fear, dr. seward, that you hardly apprehend my wish. i desire to
go at once--here--now--this very hour--this very moment, if i may. time
presses, and in our implied agreement with the old scytheman it is of
the essence of the contract. i am sure it is only necessary to put
before so admirable a practitioner as dr. seward so simple, yet so
momentous a wish, to ensure its fulfilment.” he looked at me keenly, and
seeing the negative in my face, turned to the others, and scrutinised
them closely. not meeting any sufficient response, he went on:--

“is it possible that i have erred in my supposition?”

“you have,” i said frankly, but at the same time, as i felt, brutally.
there was a considerable pause, and then he said slowly:--

“then i suppose i must only shift my ground of request. let me ask for
this concession--boon, privilege, what you will. i am content to implore
in such a case, not on personal grounds, but for the sake of others. i
am not at liberty to give you the whole of my reasons; but you may, i
assure you, take it from me that they are good ones, sound and
unselfish, and spring from the highest sense of duty. could you look,
sir, into my heart, you would approve to the full the sentiments which
animate me. nay, more, you would count me amongst the best and truest of
your friends.” again he looked at us all keenly. i had a growing
conviction that this sudden change of his entire intellectual method was
but yet another form or phase of his madness, and so determined to let
him go on a little longer, knowing from experience that he would, like
all lunatics, give himself away in the end. van helsing was gazing at
him with a look of utmost intensity, his bushy eyebrows almost meeting
with the fixed concentration of his look. he said to renfield in a tone
which did not surprise me at the time, but only when i thought of it
afterwards--for it was as of one addressing an equal:--

“can you not tell frankly your real reason for wishing to be free
to-night? i will undertake that if you will satisfy even me--a stranger,
without prejudice, and with the habit of keeping an open mind--dr.
seward will give you, at his own risk and on his own responsibility, the
privilege you seek.” he shook his head sadly, and with a look of
poignant regret on his face. the professor went on:--

“come, sir, bethink yourself. you claim the privilege of reason in the
highest degree, since you seek to impress us with your complete
reasonableness. you do this, whose sanity we have reason to doubt, since
you are not yet released from medical treatment for this very defect. if
you will not help us in our effort to choose the wisest course, how can
we perform the duty which you yourself put upon us? be wise, and help
us; and if we can we shall aid you to achieve your wish.” he still shook
his head as he said:--

“dr. van helsing, i have nothing to say. your argument is complete, and
if i were free to speak i should not hesitate a moment; but i am not my
own master in the matter. i can only ask you to trust me. if i am
refused, the responsibility does not rest with me.” i thought it was now
time to end the scene, which was becoming too comically grave, so i went
towards the door, simply saying:--

“come, my friends, we have work to do. good-night.”

as, however, i got near the door, a new change came over the patient. he
moved towards me so quickly that for the moment i feared that he was
about to make another homicidal attack. my fears, however, were
groundless, for he held up his two hands imploringly, and made his
petition in a moving manner. as he saw that the very excess of his
emotion was militating against him, by restoring us more to our old
relations, he became still more demonstrative. i glanced at van helsing,
and saw my conviction reflected in his eyes; so i became a little more
fixed in my manner, if not more stern, and motioned to him that his
efforts were unavailing. i had previously seen something of the same
constantly growing excitement in him when he had to make some request of
which at the time he had thought much, such, for instance, as when he
wanted a cat; and i was prepared to see the collapse into the same
sullen acquiescence on this occasion. my expectation was not realised,
for, when he found that his appeal would not be successful, he got into
quite a frantic condition. he threw himself on his knees, and held up
his hands, wringing them in plaintive supplication, and poured forth a
torrent of entreaty, with the tears rolling down his cheeks, and his
whole face and form expressive of the deepest emotion:--

“let me entreat you, dr. seward, oh, let me implore you, to let me out
of this house at once. send me away how you will and where you will;
send keepers with me with whips and chains; let them take me in a
strait-waistcoat, manacled and leg-ironed, even to a gaol; but let me go
out of this. you don’t know what you do by keeping me here. i am
speaking from the depths of my heart--of my very soul. you don’t know
whom you wrong, or how; and i may not tell. woe is me! i may not tell.
by all you hold sacred--by all you hold dear--by your love that is
lost--by your hope that lives--for the sake of the almighty, take me out
of this and save my soul from guilt! can’t you hear me, man? can’t you
understand? will you never learn? don’t you know that i am sane and
earnest now; that i am no lunatic in a mad fit, but a sane man fighting
for his soul? oh, hear me! hear me! let me go! let me go! let me go!”

i thought that the longer this went on the wilder he would get, and so
would bring on a fit; so i took him by the hand and raised him up.

“come,” i said sternly, “no more of this; we have had quite enough
already. get to your bed and try to behave more discreetly.”

he suddenly stopped and looked at me intently for several moments. then,
without a word, he rose and moving over, sat down on the side of the
bed. the collapse had come, as on former occasion, just as i had
expected.

when i was leaving the room, last of our party, he said to me in a
quiet, well-bred voice:--

“you will, i trust, dr. seward, do me the justice to bear in mind, later
on, that i did what i could to convince you to-night.”




chapter xix

jonathan harker’s journal


_1 october, 5 a. m._--i went with the party to the search with an easy
mind, for i think i never saw mina so absolutely strong and well. i am
so glad that she consented to hold back and let us men do the work.
somehow, it was a dread to me that she was in this fearful business at
all; but now that her work is done, and that it is due to her energy and
brains and foresight that the whole story is put together in such a way
that every point tells, she may well feel that her part is finished, and
that she can henceforth leave the rest to us. we were, i think, all a
little upset by the scene with mr. renfield. when we came away from his
room we were silent till we got back to the study. then mr. morris said
to dr. seward:--

“say, jack, if that man wasn’t attempting a bluff, he is about the
sanest lunatic i ever saw. i’m not sure, but i believe that he had some
serious purpose, and if he had, it was pretty rough on him not to get a
chance.” lord godalming and i were silent, but dr. van helsing added:--

“friend john, you know more of lunatics than i do, and i’m glad of it,
for i fear that if it had been to me to decide i would before that last
hysterical outburst have given him free. but we live and learn, and in
our present task we must take no chance, as my friend quincey would say.
all is best as they are.” dr. seward seemed to answer them both in a
dreamy kind of way:--

“i don’t know but that i agree with you. if that man had been an
ordinary lunatic i would have taken my chance of trusting him; but he
seems so mixed up with the count in an indexy kind of way that i am
afraid of doing anything wrong by helping his fads. i can’t forget how
he prayed with almost equal fervour for a cat, and then tried to tear my
throat out with his teeth. besides, he called the count ‘lord and
master,’ and he may want to get out to help him in some diabolical way.
that horrid thing has the wolves and the rats and his own kind to help
him, so i suppose he isn’t above trying to use a respectable lunatic. he
certainly did seem earnest, though. i only hope we have done what is
best. these things, in conjunction with the wild work we have in hand,
help to unnerve a man.” the professor stepped over, and laying his hand
on his shoulder, said in his grave, kindly way:--

“friend john, have no fear. we are trying to do our duty in a very sad
and terrible case; we can only do as we deem best. what else have we to
hope for, except the pity of the good god?” lord godalming had slipped
away for a few minutes, but now he returned. he held up a little silver
whistle, as he remarked:--

“that old place may be full of rats, and if so, i’ve got an antidote on
call.” having passed the wall, we took our way to the house, taking care
to keep in the shadows of the trees on the lawn when the moonlight shone
out. when we got to the porch the professor opened his bag and took out
a lot of things, which he laid on the step, sorting them into four
little groups, evidently one for each. then he spoke:--

“my friends, we are going into a terrible danger, and we need arms of
many kinds. our enemy is not merely spiritual. remember that he has the
strength of twenty men, and that, though our necks or our windpipes are
of the common kind--and therefore breakable or crushable--his are not
amenable to mere strength. a stronger man, or a body of men more strong
in all than him, can at certain times hold him; but they cannot hurt him
as we can be hurt by him. we must, therefore, guard ourselves from his
touch. keep this near your heart”--as he spoke he lifted a little silver
crucifix and held it out to me, i being nearest to him--“put these
flowers round your neck”--here he handed to me a wreath of withered
garlic blossoms--“for other enemies more mundane, this revolver and this
knife; and for aid in all, these so small electric lamps, which you can
fasten to your breast; and for all, and above all at the last, this,
which we must not desecrate needless.” this was a portion of sacred
wafer, which he put in an envelope and handed to me. each of the others
was similarly equipped. “now,” he said, “friend john, where are the
skeleton keys? if so that we can open the door, we need not break house
by the window, as before at miss lucy’s.”

dr. seward tried one or two skeleton keys, his mechanical dexterity as a
surgeon standing him in good stead. presently he got one to suit; after
a little play back and forward the bolt yielded, and, with a rusty
clang, shot back. we pressed on the door, the rusty hinges creaked, and
it slowly opened. it was startlingly like the image conveyed to me in
dr. seward’s diary of the opening of miss westenra’s tomb; i fancy that
the same idea seemed to strike the others, for with one accord they
shrank back. the professor was the first to move forward, and stepped
into the open door.

“_in manus tuas, domine!_” he said, crossing himself as he passed over
the threshold. we closed the door behind us, lest when we should have
lit our lamps we should possibly attract attention from the road. the
professor carefully tried the lock, lest we might not be able to open it
from within should we be in a hurry making our exit. then we all lit our
lamps and proceeded on our search.

the light from the tiny lamps fell in all sorts of odd forms, as the
rays crossed each other, or the opacity of our bodies threw great
shadows. i could not for my life get away from the feeling that there
was some one else amongst us. i suppose it was the recollection, so
powerfully brought home to me by the grim surroundings, of that terrible
experience in transylvania. i think the feeling was common to us all,
for i noticed that the others kept looking over their shoulders at every
sound and every new shadow, just as i felt myself doing.

the whole place was thick with dust. the floor was seemingly inches
deep, except where there were recent footsteps, in which on holding down
my lamp i could see marks of hobnails where the dust was cracked. the
walls were fluffy and heavy with dust, and in the corners were masses of
spider’s webs, whereon the dust had gathered till they looked like old
tattered rags as the weight had torn them partly down. on a table in the
hall was a great bunch of keys, with a time-yellowed label on each. they
had been used several times, for on the table were several similar rents
in the blanket of dust, similar to that exposed when the professor
lifted them. he turned to me and said:--

“you know this place, jonathan. you have copied maps of it, and you know
it at least more than we do. which is the way to the chapel?” i had an
idea of its direction, though on my former visit i had not been able to
get admission to it; so i led the way, and after a few wrong turnings
found myself opposite a low, arched oaken door, ribbed with iron bands.
“this is the spot,” said the professor as he turned his lamp on a small
map of the house, copied from the file of my original correspondence
regarding the purchase. with a little trouble we found the key on the
bunch and opened the door. we were prepared for some unpleasantness, for
as we were opening the door a faint, malodorous air seemed to exhale
through the gaps, but none of us ever expected such an odour as we
encountered. none of the others had met the count at all at close
quarters, and when i had seen him he was either in the fasting stage of
his existence in his rooms or, when he was gloated with fresh blood, in
a ruined building open to the air; but here the place was small and
close, and the long disuse had made the air stagnant and foul. there was
an earthy smell, as of some dry miasma, which came through the fouler
air. but as to the odour itself, how shall i describe it? it was not
alone that it was composed of all the ills of mortality and with the
pungent, acrid smell of blood, but it seemed as though corruption had
become itself corrupt. faugh! it sickens me to think of it. every breath
exhaled by that monster seemed to have clung to the place and
intensified its loathsomeness.

under ordinary circumstances such a stench would have brought our
enterprise to an end; but this was no ordinary case, and the high and
terrible purpose in which we were involved gave us a strength which rose
above merely physical considerations. after the involuntary shrinking
consequent on the first nauseous whiff, we one and all set about our
work as though that loathsome place were a garden of roses.

we made an accurate examination of the place, the professor saying as we
began:--

“the first thing is to see how many of the boxes are left; we must then
examine every hole and corner and cranny and see if we cannot get some
clue as to what has become of the rest.” a glance was sufficient to show
how many remained, for the great earth chests were bulky, and there was
no mistaking them.

there were only twenty-nine left out of the fifty! once i got a fright,
for, seeing lord godalming suddenly turn and look out of the vaulted
door into the dark passage beyond, i looked too, and for an instant my
heart stood still. somewhere, looking out from the shadow, i seemed to
see the high lights of the count’s evil face, the ridge of the nose, the
red eyes, the red lips, the awful pallor. it was only for a moment, for,
as lord godalming said, “i thought i saw a face, but it was only the
shadows,” and resumed his inquiry, i turned my lamp in the direction,
and stepped into the passage. there was no sign of any one; and as there
were no corners, no doors, no aperture of any kind, but only the solid
walls of the passage, there could be no hiding-place even for _him_. i
took it that fear had helped imagination, and said nothing.

a few minutes later i saw morris step suddenly back from a corner, which
he was examining. we all followed his movements with our eyes, for
undoubtedly some nervousness was growing on us, and we saw a whole mass
of phosphorescence, which twinkled like stars. we all instinctively drew
back. the whole place was becoming alive with rats.

for a moment or two we stood appalled, all save lord godalming, who was
seemingly prepared for such an emergency. rushing over to the great
iron-bound oaken door, which dr. seward had described from the outside,
and which i had seen myself, he turned the key in the lock, drew the
huge bolts, and swung the door open. then, taking his little silver
whistle from his pocket, he blew a low, shrill call. it was answered
from behind dr. seward’s house by the yelping of dogs, and after about a
minute three terriers came dashing round the corner of the house.
unconsciously we had all moved towards the door, and as we moved i
noticed that the dust had been much disturbed: the boxes which had been
taken out had been brought this way. but even in the minute that had
elapsed the number of the rats had vastly increased. they seemed to
swarm over the place all at once, till the lamplight, shining on their
moving dark bodies and glittering, baleful eyes, made the place look
like a bank of earth set with fireflies. the dogs dashed on, but at the
threshold suddenly stopped and snarled, and then, simultaneously lifting
their noses, began to howl in most lugubrious fashion. the rats were
multiplying in thousands, and we moved out.

lord godalming lifted one of the dogs, and carrying him in, placed him
on the floor. the instant his feet touched the ground he seemed to
recover his courage, and rushed at his natural enemies. they fled before
him so fast that before he had shaken the life out of a score, the other
dogs, who had by now been lifted in the same manner, had but small prey
ere the whole mass had vanished.

with their going it seemed as if some evil presence had departed, for
the dogs frisked about and barked merrily as they made sudden darts at
their prostrate foes, and turned them over and over and tossed them in
the air with vicious shakes. we all seemed to find our spirits rise.
whether it was the purifying of the deadly atmosphere by the opening of
the chapel door, or the relief which we experienced by finding ourselves
in the open i know not; but most certainly the shadow of dread seemed to
slip from us like a robe, and the occasion of our coming lost something
of its grim significance, though we did not slacken a whit in our
resolution. we closed the outer door and barred and locked it, and
bringing the dogs with us, began our search of the house. we found
nothing throughout except dust in extraordinary proportions, and all
untouched save for my own footsteps when i had made my first visit.
never once did the dogs exhibit any symptom of uneasiness, and even when
we returned to the chapel they frisked about as though they had been
rabbit-hunting in a summer wood.

the morning was quickening in the east when we emerged from the front.
dr. van helsing had taken the key of the hall-door from the bunch, and
locked the door in orthodox fashion, putting the key into his pocket
when he had done.

“so far,” he said, “our night has been eminently successful. no harm has
come to us such as i feared might be and yet we have ascertained how
many boxes are missing. more than all do i rejoice that this, our
first--and perhaps our most difficult and dangerous--step has been
accomplished without the bringing thereinto our most sweet madam mina or
troubling her waking or sleeping thoughts with sights and sounds and
smells of horror which she might never forget. one lesson, too, we have
learned, if it be allowable to argue _a particulari_: that the brute
beasts which are to the count’s command are yet themselves not amenable
to his spiritual power; for look, these rats that would come to his
call, just as from his castle top he summon the wolves to your going and
to that poor mother’s cry, though they come to him, they run pell-mell
from the so little dogs of my friend arthur. we have other matters
before us, other dangers, other fears; and that monster--he has not used
his power over the brute world for the only or the last time to-night.
so be it that he has gone elsewhere. good! it has given us opportunity
to cry ‘check’ in some ways in this chess game, which we play for the
stake of human souls. and now let us go home. the dawn is close at hand,
and we have reason to be content with our first night’s work. it may be
ordained that we have many nights and days to follow, if full of peril;
but we must go on, and from no danger shall we shrink.”

the house was silent when we got back, save for some poor creature who
was screaming away in one of the distant wards, and a low, moaning sound
from renfield’s room. the poor wretch was doubtless torturing himself,
after the manner of the insane, with needless thoughts of pain.

i came tiptoe into our own room, and found mina asleep, breathing so
softly that i had to put my ear down to hear it. she looks paler than
usual. i hope the meeting to-night has not upset her. i am truly
thankful that she is to be left out of our future work, and even of our
deliberations. it is too great a strain for a woman to bear. i did not
think so at first, but i know better now. therefore i am glad that it is
settled. there may be things which would frighten her to hear; and yet
to conceal them from her might be worse than to tell her if once she
suspected that there was any concealment. henceforth our work is to be a
sealed book to her, till at least such time as we can tell her that all
is finished, and the earth free from a monster of the nether world. i
daresay it will be difficult to begin to keep silence after such
confidence as ours; but i must be resolute, and to-morrow i shall keep
dark over to-night’s doings, and shall refuse to speak of anything that
has happened. i rest on the sofa, so as not to disturb her.

       *       *       *       *       *

_1 october, later._--i suppose it was natural that we should have all
overslept ourselves, for the day was a busy one, and the night had no
rest at all. even mina must have felt its exhaustion, for though i slept
till the sun was high, i was awake before her, and had to call two or
three times before she awoke. indeed, she was so sound asleep that for a
few seconds she did not recognize me, but looked at me with a sort of
blank terror, as one looks who has been waked out of a bad dream. she
complained a little of being tired, and i let her rest till later in the
day. we now know of twenty-one boxes having been removed, and if it be
that several were taken in any of these removals we may be able to trace
them all. such will, of course, immensely simplify our labour, and the
sooner the matter is attended to the better. i shall look up thomas
snelling to-day.


_dr. seward’s diary._

_1 october._--it was towards noon when i was awakened by the professor
walking into my room. he was more jolly and cheerful than usual, and it
is quite evident that last night’s work has helped to take some of the
brooding weight off his mind. after going over the adventure of the
night he suddenly said:--

“your patient interests me much. may it be that with you i visit him
this morning? or if that you are too occupy, i can go alone if it may
be. it is a new experience to me to find a lunatic who talk philosophy,
and reason so sound.” i had some work to do which pressed, so i told him
that if he would go alone i would be glad, as then i should not have to
keep him waiting; so i called an attendant and gave him the necessary
instructions. before the professor left the room i cautioned him against
getting any false impression from my patient. “but,” he answered, “i
want him to talk of himself and of his delusion as to consuming live
things. he said to madam mina, as i see in your diary of yesterday, that
he had once had such a belief. why do you smile, friend john?”

“excuse me,” i said, “but the answer is here.” i laid my hand on the
type-written matter. “when our sane and learned lunatic made that very
statement of how he _used_ to consume life, his mouth was actually
nauseous with the flies and spiders which he had eaten just before mrs.
harker entered the room.” van helsing smiled in turn. “good!” he said.
“your memory is true, friend john. i should have remembered. and yet it
is this very obliquity of thought and memory which makes mental disease
such a fascinating study. perhaps i may gain more knowledge out of the
folly of this madman than i shall from the teaching of the most wise.
who knows?” i went on with my work, and before long was through that in
hand. it seemed that the time had been very short indeed, but there was
van helsing back in the study. “do i interrupt?” he asked politely as he
stood at the door.

“not at all,” i answered. “come in. my work is finished, and i am free.
i can go with you now, if you like.

“it is needless; i have seen him!”

“well?”

“i fear that he does not appraise me at much. our interview was short.
when i entered his room he was sitting on a stool in the centre, with
his elbows on his knees, and his face was the picture of sullen
discontent. i spoke to him as cheerfully as i could, and with such a
measure of respect as i could assume. he made no reply whatever. “don’t
you know me?” i asked. his answer was not reassuring: “i know you well
enough; you are the old fool van helsing. i wish you would take yourself
and your idiotic brain theories somewhere else. damn all thick-headed
dutchmen!” not a word more would he say, but sat in his implacable
sullenness as indifferent to me as though i had not been in the room at
all. thus departed for this time my chance of much learning from this so
clever lunatic; so i shall go, if i may, and cheer myself with a few
happy words with that sweet soul madam mina. friend john, it does
rejoice me unspeakable that she is no more to be pained, no more to be
worried with our terrible things. though we shall much miss her help, it
is better so.”

“i agree with you with all my heart,” i answered earnestly, for i did
not want him to weaken in this matter. “mrs. harker is better out of it.
things are quite bad enough for us, all men of the world, and who have
been in many tight places in our time; but it is no place for a woman,
and if she had remained in touch with the affair, it would in time
infallibly have wrecked her.”

so van helsing has gone to confer with mrs. harker and harker; quincey
and art are all out following up the clues as to the earth-boxes. i
shall finish my round of work and we shall meet to-night.


_mina harker’s journal._

_1 october._--it is strange to me to be kept in the dark as i am to-day;
after jonathan’s full confidence for so many years, to see him
manifestly avoid certain matters, and those the most vital of all. this
morning i slept late after the fatigues of yesterday, and though
jonathan was late too, he was the earlier. he spoke to me before he went
out, never more sweetly or tenderly, but he never mentioned a word of
what had happened in the visit to the count’s house. and yet he must
have known how terribly anxious i was. poor dear fellow! i suppose it
must have distressed him even more than it did me. they all agreed that
it was best that i should not be drawn further into this awful work, and
i acquiesced. but to think that he keeps anything from me! and now i am
crying like a silly fool, when i _know_ it comes from my husband’s great
love and from the good, good wishes of those other strong men.

that has done me good. well, some day jonathan will tell me all; and
lest it should ever be that he should think for a moment that i kept
anything from him, i still keep my journal as usual. then if he has
feared of my trust i shall show it to him, with every thought of my
heart put down for his dear eyes to read. i feel strangely sad and
low-spirited to-day. i suppose it is the reaction from the terrible
excitement.

last night i went to bed when the men had gone, simply because they told
me to. i didn’t feel sleepy, and i did feel full of devouring anxiety. i
kept thinking over everything that has been ever since jonathan came to
see me in london, and it all seems like a horrible tragedy, with fate
pressing on relentlessly to some destined end. everything that one does
seems, no matter how right it may be, to bring on the very thing which
is most to be deplored. if i hadn’t gone to whitby, perhaps poor dear
lucy would be with us now. she hadn’t taken to visiting the churchyard
till i came, and if she hadn’t come there in the day-time with me she
wouldn’t have walked there in her sleep; and if she hadn’t gone there at
night and asleep, that monster couldn’t have destroyed her as he did.
oh, why did i ever go to whitby? there now, crying again! i wonder what
has come over me to-day. i must hide it from jonathan, for if he knew
that i had been crying twice in one morning--i, who never cried on my
own account, and whom he has never caused to shed a tear--the dear
fellow would fret his heart out. i shall put a bold face on, and if i do
feel weepy, he shall never see it. i suppose it is one of the lessons
that we poor women have to learn....

i can’t quite remember how i fell asleep last night. i remember hearing
the sudden barking of the dogs and a lot of queer sounds, like praying
on a very tumultuous scale, from mr. renfield’s room, which is somewhere
under this. and then there was silence over everything, silence so
profound that it startled me, and i got up and looked out of the window.
all was dark and silent, the black shadows thrown by the moonlight
seeming full of a silent mystery of their own. not a thing seemed to be
stirring, but all to be grim and fixed as death or fate; so that a thin
streak of white mist, that crept with almost imperceptible slowness
across the grass towards the house, seemed to have a sentience and a
vitality of its own. i think that the digression of my thoughts must
have done me good, for when i got back to bed i found a lethargy
creeping over me. i lay a while, but could not quite sleep, so i got out
and looked out of the window again. the mist was spreading, and was now
close up to the house, so that i could see it lying thick against the
wall, as though it were stealing up to the windows. the poor man was
more loud than ever, and though i could not distinguish a word he said,
i could in some way recognise in his tones some passionate entreaty on
his part. then there was the sound of a struggle, and i knew that the
attendants were dealing with him. i was so frightened that i crept into
bed, and pulled the clothes over my head, putting my fingers in my ears.
i was not then a bit sleepy, at least so i thought; but i must have
fallen asleep, for, except dreams, i do not remember anything until the
morning, when jonathan woke me. i think that it took me an effort and a
little time to realise where i was, and that it was jonathan who was
bending over me. my dream was very peculiar, and was almost typical of
the way that waking thoughts become merged in, or continued in, dreams.

i thought that i was asleep, and waiting for jonathan to come back. i
was very anxious about him, and i was powerless to act; my feet, and my
hands, and my brain were weighted, so that nothing could proceed at the
usual pace. and so i slept uneasily and thought. then it began to dawn
upon me that the air was heavy, and dank, and cold. i put back the
clothes from my face, and found, to my surprise, that all was dim
around. the gaslight which i had left lit for jonathan, but turned down,
came only like a tiny red spark through the fog, which had evidently
grown thicker and poured into the room. then it occurred to me that i
had shut the window before i had come to bed. i would have got out to
make certain on the point, but some leaden lethargy seemed to chain my
limbs and even my will. i lay still and endured; that was all. i closed
my eyes, but could still see through my eyelids. (it is wonderful what
tricks our dreams play us, and how conveniently we can imagine.) the
mist grew thicker and thicker and i could see now how it came in, for i
could see it like smoke--or with the white energy of boiling
water--pouring in, not through the window, but through the joinings of
the door. it got thicker and thicker, till it seemed as if it became
concentrated into a sort of pillar of cloud in the room, through the top
of which i could see the light of the gas shining like a red eye. things
began to whirl through my brain just as the cloudy column was now
whirling in the room, and through it all came the scriptural words “a
pillar of cloud by day and of fire by night.” was it indeed some such
spiritual guidance that was coming to me in my sleep? but the pillar was
composed of both the day and the night-guiding, for the fire was in the
red eye, which at the thought got a new fascination for me; till, as i
looked, the fire divided, and seemed to shine on me through the fog like
two red eyes, such as lucy told me of in her momentary mental wandering
when, on the cliff, the dying sunlight struck the windows of st. mary’s
church. suddenly the horror burst upon me that it was thus that jonathan
had seen those awful women growing into reality through the whirling mist
in the moonlight, and in my dream i must have fainted, for all became
black darkness. the last conscious effort which imagination made was to
show me a livid white face bending over me out of the mist. i must be
careful of such dreams, for they would unseat one’s reason if there were
too much of them. i would get dr. van helsing or dr. seward to prescribe
something for me which would make me sleep, only that i fear to alarm
them. such a dream at the present time would become woven into their
fears for me. to-night i shall strive hard to sleep naturally. if i do
not, i shall to-morrow night get them to give me a dose of chloral; that
cannot hurt me for once, and it will give me a good night’s sleep. last
night tired me more than if i had not slept at all.

       *       *       *       *       *

_2 october 10 p. m._--last night i slept, but did not dream. i must have
slept soundly, for i was not waked by jonathan coming to bed; but the
sleep has not refreshed me, for to-day i feel terribly weak and
spiritless. i spent all yesterday trying to read, or lying down dozing.
in the afternoon mr. renfield asked if he might see me. poor man, he was
very gentle, and when i came away he kissed my hand and bade god bless
me. some way it affected me much; i am crying when i think of him. this
is a new weakness, of which i must be careful. jonathan would be
miserable if he knew i had been crying. he and the others were out till
dinner-time, and they all came in tired. i did what i could to brighten
them up, and i suppose that the effort did me good, for i forgot how
tired i was. after dinner they sent me to bed, and all went off to smoke
together, as they said, but i knew that they wanted to tell each other
of what had occurred to each during the day; i could see from jonathan’s
manner that he had something important to communicate. i was not so
sleepy as i should have been; so before they went i asked dr. seward to
give me a little opiate of some kind, as i had not slept well the night
before. he very kindly made me up a sleeping draught, which he gave to
me, telling me that it would do me no harm, as it was very mild.... i
have taken it, and am waiting for sleep, which still keeps aloof. i hope
i have not done wrong, for as sleep begins to flirt with me, a new fear
comes: that i may have been foolish in thus depriving myself of the
power of waking. i might want it. here comes sleep. good-night.




chapter xx

jonathan harker’s journal


_1 october, evening._--i found thomas snelling in his house at bethnal
green, but unhappily he was not in a condition to remember anything. the
very prospect of beer which my expected coming had opened to him had
proved too much, and he had begun too early on his expected debauch. i
learned, however, from his wife, who seemed a decent, poor soul, that he
was only the assistant to smollet, who of the two mates was the
responsible person. so off i drove to walworth, and found mr. joseph
smollet at home and in his shirtsleeves, taking a late tea out of a
saucer. he is a decent, intelligent fellow, distinctly a good, reliable
type of workman, and with a headpiece of his own. he remembered all
about the incident of the boxes, and from a wonderful dog’s-eared
notebook, which he produced from some mysterious receptacle about the
seat of his trousers, and which had hieroglyphical entries in thick,
half-obliterated pencil, he gave me the destinations of the boxes. there
were, he said, six in the cartload which he took from carfax and left at
197, chicksand street, mile end new town, and another six which he
deposited at jamaica lane, bermondsey. if then the count meant to
scatter these ghastly refuges of his over london, these places were
chosen as the first of delivery, so that later he might distribute more
fully. the systematic manner in which this was done made me think that
he could not mean to confine himself to two sides of london. he was now
fixed on the far east of the northern shore, on the east of the southern
shore, and on the south. the north and west were surely never meant to
be left out of his diabolical scheme--let alone the city itself and the
very heart of fashionable london in the south-west and west. i went back
to smollet, and asked him if he could tell us if any other boxes had
been taken from carfax.

he replied:--

“well, guv’nor, you’ve treated me wery ’an’some”--i had given him half a
sovereign--“an’ i’ll tell yer all i know. i heard a man by the name of
bloxam say four nights ago in the ’are an’ ’ounds, in pincher’s alley,
as ’ow he an’ his mate ’ad ’ad a rare dusty job in a old ’ouse at
purfect. there ain’t a-many such jobs as this ’ere, an’ i’m thinkin’
that maybe sam bloxam could tell ye summut.” i asked if he could tell me
where to find him. i told him that if he could get me the address it
would be worth another half-sovereign to him. so he gulped down the rest
of his tea and stood up, saying that he was going to begin the search
then and there. at the door he stopped, and said:--

“look ’ere, guv’nor, there ain’t no sense in me a-keepin’ you ’ere. i
may find sam soon, or i mayn’t; but anyhow he ain’t like to be in a way
to tell ye much to-night. sam is a rare one when he starts on the booze.
if you can give me a envelope with a stamp on it, and put yer address on
it, i’ll find out where sam is to be found and post it ye to-night. but
ye’d better be up arter ’im soon in the mornin’, or maybe ye won’t ketch
’im; for sam gets off main early, never mind the booze the night afore.”

this was all practical, so one of the children went off with a penny to
buy an envelope and a sheet of paper, and to keep the change. when she
came back, i addressed the envelope and stamped it, and when smollet had
again faithfully promised to post the address when found, i took my way
to home. we’re on the track anyhow. i am tired to-night, and want sleep.
mina is fast asleep, and looks a little too pale; her eyes look as
though she had been crying. poor dear, i’ve no doubt it frets her to be
kept in the dark, and it may make her doubly anxious about me and the
others. but it is best as it is. it is better to be disappointed and
worried in such a way now than to have her nerve broken. the doctors
were quite right to insist on her being kept out of this dreadful
business. i must be firm, for on me this particular burden of silence
must rest. i shall not ever enter on the subject with her under any
circumstances. indeed, it may not be a hard task, after all, for she
herself has become reticent on the subject, and has not spoken of the
count or his doings ever since we told her of our decision.

       *       *       *       *       *

_2 october, evening._--a long and trying and exciting day. by the first
post i got my directed envelope with a dirty scrap of paper enclosed, on
which was written with a carpenter’s pencil in a sprawling hand:--

“sam bloxam, korkrans, 4, poters cort, bartel street, walworth. arsk for
the depite.”

i got the letter in bed, and rose without waking mina. she looked heavy
and sleepy and pale, and far from well. i determined not to wake her,
but that, when i should return from this new search, i would arrange for
her going back to exeter. i think she would be happier in our own home,
with her daily tasks to interest her, than in being here amongst us and
in ignorance. i only saw dr. seward for a moment, and told him where i
was off to, promising to come back and tell the rest so soon as i should
have found out anything. i drove to walworth and found, with some
difficulty, potter’s court. mr. smollet’s spelling misled me, as i asked
for poter’s court instead of potter’s court. however, when i had found
the court, i had no difficulty in discovering corcoran’s lodging-house.
when i asked the man who came to the door for the “depite,” he shook his
head, and said: “i dunno ’im. there ain’t no such a person ’ere; i never
’eard of ’im in all my bloomin’ days. don’t believe there ain’t nobody
of that kind livin’ ere or anywheres.” i took out smollet’s letter, and
as i read it it seemed to me that the lesson of the spelling of the name
of the court might guide me. “what are you?” i asked.

“i’m the depity,” he answered. i saw at once that i was on the right
track; phonetic spelling had again misled me. a half-crown tip put the
deputy’s knowledge at my disposal, and i learned that mr. bloxam, who
had slept off the remains of his beer on the previous night at
corcoran’s, had left for his work at poplar at five o’clock that
morning. he could not tell me where the place of work was situated, but
he had a vague idea that it was some kind of a “new-fangled ware’us”;
and with this slender clue i had to start for poplar. it was twelve
o’clock before i got any satisfactory hint of such a building, and this
i got at a coffee-shop, where some workmen were having their dinner. one
of these suggested that there was being erected at cross angel street a
new “cold storage” building; and as this suited the condition of a
“new-fangled ware’us,” i at once drove to it. an interview with a surly
gatekeeper and a surlier foreman, both of whom were appeased with the
coin of the realm, put me on the track of bloxam; he was sent for on my
suggesting that i was willing to pay his day’s wages to his foreman for
the privilege of asking him a few questions on a private matter. he was
a smart enough fellow, though rough of speech and bearing. when i had
promised to pay for his information and given him an earnest, he told me
that he had made two journeys between carfax and a house in piccadilly,
and had taken from this house to the latter nine great boxes--“main
heavy ones”--with a horse and cart hired by him for this purpose. i
asked him if he could tell me the number of the house in piccadilly, to
which he replied:--

“well, guv’nor, i forgits the number, but it was only a few doors from a
big white church or somethink of the kind, not long built. it was a
dusty old ’ouse, too, though nothin’ to the dustiness of the ’ouse we
tooked the bloomin’ boxes from.”

“how did you get into the houses if they were both empty?”

“there was the old party what engaged me a-waitin’ in the ’ouse at
purfleet. he ’elped me to lift the boxes and put them in the dray. curse
me, but he was the strongest chap i ever struck, an’ him a old feller,
with a white moustache, one that thin you would think he couldn’t throw
a shadder.”

how this phrase thrilled through me!

“why, ’e took up ’is end o’ the boxes like they was pounds of tea, and
me a-puffin’ an’ a-blowin’ afore i could up-end mine anyhow--an’ i’m no
chicken, neither.”

“how did you get into the house in piccadilly?” i asked.

“he was there too. he must ’a’ started off and got there afore me, for
when i rung of the bell he kem an’ opened the door ’isself an’ ’elped me
to carry the boxes into the ’all.”

“the whole nine?” i asked.

“yus; there was five in the first load an’ four in the second. it was
main dry work, an’ i don’t so well remember ’ow i got ’ome.” i
interrupted him:--

“were the boxes left in the hall?”

“yus; it was a big ’all, an’ there was nothin’ else in it.” i made one
more attempt to further matters:--

“you didn’t have any key?”

“never used no key nor nothink. the old gent, he opened the door ’isself
an’ shut it again when i druv off. i don’t remember the last time--but
that was the beer.”

“and you can’t remember the number of the house?”

“no, sir. but ye needn’t have no difficulty about that. it’s a ’igh ’un
with a stone front with a bow on it, an’ ’igh steps up to the door. i
know them steps, ’avin’ ’ad to carry the boxes up with three loafers
what come round to earn a copper. the old gent give them shillin’s, an’
they seein’ they got so much, they wanted more; but ’e took one of them
by the shoulder and was like to throw ’im down the steps, till the lot
of them went away cussin’.” i thought that with this description i could
find the house, so, having paid my friend for his information, i started
off for piccadilly. i had gained a new painful experience; the count
could, it was evident, handle the earth-boxes himself. if so, time was
precious; for, now that he had achieved a certain amount of
distribution, he could, by choosing his own time, complete the task
unobserved. at piccadilly circus i discharged my cab, and walked
westward; beyond the junior constitutional i came across the house
described, and was satisfied that this was the next of the lairs
arranged by dracula. the house looked as though it had been long
untenanted. the windows were encrusted with dust, and the shutters were
up. all the framework was black with time, and from the iron the paint
had mostly scaled away. it was evident that up to lately there had been
a large notice-board in front of the balcony; it had, however, been
roughly torn away, the uprights which had supported it still remaining.
behind the rails of the balcony i saw there were some loose boards,
whose raw edges looked white. i would have given a good deal to have
been able to see the notice-board intact, as it would, perhaps, have
given some clue to the ownership of the house. i remembered my
experience of the investigation and purchase of carfax, and i could not
but feel that if i could find the former owner there might be some means
discovered of gaining access to the house.

there was at present nothing to be learned from the piccadilly side, and
nothing could be done; so i went round to the back to see if anything
could be gathered from this quarter. the mews were active, the
piccadilly houses being mostly in occupation. i asked one or two of the
grooms and helpers whom i saw around if they could tell me anything
about the empty house. one of them said that he heard it had lately been
taken, but he couldn’t say from whom. he told me, however, that up to
very lately there had been a notice-board of “for sale” up, and that
perhaps mitchell, sons, & candy, the house agents, could tell me
something, as he thought he remembered seeing the name of that firm on
the board. i did not wish to seem too eager, or to let my informant know
or guess too much, so, thanking him in the usual manner, i strolled
away. it was now growing dusk, and the autumn night was closing in, so i
did not lose any time. having learned the address of mitchell, sons, &
candy from a directory at the berkeley, i was soon at their office in
sackville street.

the gentleman who saw me was particularly suave in manner, but
uncommunicative in equal proportion. having once told me that the
piccadilly house--which throughout our interview he called a
“mansion”--was sold, he considered my business as concluded. when i
asked who had purchased it, he opened his eyes a thought wider, and
paused a few seconds before replying:--

“it is sold, sir.”

“pardon me,” i said, with equal politeness, “but i have a special reason
for wishing to know who purchased it.”

again he paused longer, and raised his eyebrows still more. “it is sold,
sir,” was again his laconic reply.

“surely,” i said, “you do not mind letting me know so much.”

“but i do mind,” he answered. “the affairs of their clients are
absolutely safe in the hands of mitchell, sons, & candy.” this was
manifestly a prig of the first water, and there was no use arguing with
him. i thought i had best meet him on his own ground, so i said:--

“your clients, sir, are happy in having so resolute a guardian of their
confidence. i am myself a professional man.” here i handed him my card.
“in this instance i am not prompted by curiosity; i act on the part of
lord godalming, who wishes to know something of the property which was,
he understood, lately for sale.” these words put a different complexion
on affairs. he said:--

“i would like to oblige you if i could, mr. harker, and especially would
i like to oblige his lordship. we once carried out a small matter of
renting some chambers for him when he was the honourable arthur
holmwood. if you will let me have his lordship’s address i will consult
the house on the subject, and will, in any case, communicate with his
lordship by to-night’s post. it will be a pleasure if we can so far
deviate from our rules as to give the required information to his
lordship.”

i wanted to secure a friend, and not to make an enemy, so i thanked him,
gave the address at dr. seward’s and came away. it was now dark, and i
was tired and hungry. i got a cup of tea at the aërated bread company
and came down to purfleet by the next train.

i found all the others at home. mina was looking tired and pale, but she
made a gallant effort to be bright and cheerful, it wrung my heart to
think that i had had to keep anything from her and so caused her
inquietude. thank god, this will be the last night of her looking on at
our conferences, and feeling the sting of our not showing our
confidence. it took all my courage to hold to the wise resolution of
keeping her out of our grim task. she seems somehow more reconciled; or
else the very subject seems to have become repugnant to her, for when
any accidental allusion is made she actually shudders. i am glad we
made our resolution in time, as with such a feeling as this, our growing
knowledge would be torture to her.

i could not tell the others of the day’s discovery till we were alone;
so after dinner--followed by a little music to save appearances even
amongst ourselves--i took mina to her room and left her to go to bed.
the dear girl was more affectionate with me than ever, and clung to me
as though she would detain me; but there was much to be talked of and i
came away. thank god, the ceasing of telling things has made no
difference between us.

when i came down again i found the others all gathered round the fire in
the study. in the train i had written my diary so far, and simply read
it off to them as the best means of letting them get abreast of my own
information; when i had finished van helsing said:--

“this has been a great day’s work, friend jonathan. doubtless we are on
the track of the missing boxes. if we find them all in that house, then
our work is near the end. but if there be some missing, we must search
until we find them. then shall we make our final _coup_, and hunt the
wretch to his real death.” we all sat silent awhile and all at once mr.
morris spoke:--

“say! how are we going to get into that house?”

“we got into the other,” answered lord godalming quickly.

“but, art, this is different. we broke house at carfax, but we had night
and a walled park to protect us. it will be a mighty different thing to
commit burglary in piccadilly, either by day or night. i confess i don’t
see how we are going to get in unless that agency duck can find us a key
of some sort; perhaps we shall know when you get his letter in the
morning.” lord godalming’s brows contracted, and he stood up and walked
about the room. by-and-by he stopped and said, turning from one to
another of us:--

“quincey’s head is level. this burglary business is getting serious; we
got off once all right; but we have now a rare job on hand--unless we
can find the count’s key basket.”

as nothing could well be done before morning, and as it would be at
least advisable to wait till lord godalming should hear from mitchell’s,
we decided not to take any active step before breakfast time. for a good
while we sat and smoked, discussing the matter in its various lights and
bearings; i took the opportunity of bringing this diary right up to the
moment. i am very sleepy and shall go to bed....

just a line. mina sleeps soundly and her breathing is regular. her
forehead is puckered up into little wrinkles, as though she thinks even
in her sleep. she is still too pale, but does not look so haggard as she
did this morning. to-morrow will, i hope, mend all this; she will be
herself at home in exeter. oh, but i am sleepy!


_dr. seward’s diary._

_1 october._--i am puzzled afresh about renfield. his moods change so
rapidly that i find it difficult to keep touch of them, and as they
always mean something more than his own well-being, they form a more
than interesting study. this morning, when i went to see him after his
repulse of van helsing, his manner was that of a man commanding destiny.
he was, in fact, commanding destiny--subjectively. he did not really
care for any of the things of mere earth; he was in the clouds and
looked down on all the weaknesses and wants of us poor mortals. i
thought i would improve the occasion and learn something, so i asked
him:--

“what about the flies these times?” he smiled on me in quite a superior
sort of way--such a smile as would have become the face of malvolio--as
he answered me:--

“the fly, my dear sir, has one striking feature; its wings are typical
of the aërial powers of the psychic faculties. the ancients did well
when they typified the soul as a butterfly!”

i thought i would push his analogy to its utmost logically, so i said
quickly:--

“oh, it is a soul you are after now, is it?” his madness foiled his
reason, and a puzzled look spread over his face as, shaking his head
with a decision which i had but seldom seen in him, he said:--

“oh, no, oh no! i want no souls. life is all i want.” here he brightened
up; “i am pretty indifferent about it at present. life is all right; i
have all i want. you must get a new patient, doctor, if you wish to
study zoöphagy!”

this puzzled me a little, so i drew him on:--

“then you command life; you are a god, i suppose?” he smiled with an
ineffably benign superiority.

“oh no! far be it from me to arrogate to myself the attributes of the
deity. i am not even concerned in his especially spiritual doings. if i
may state my intellectual position i am, so far as concerns things
purely terrestrial, somewhat in the position which enoch occupied
spiritually!” this was a poser to me. i could not at the moment recall
enoch’s appositeness; so i had to ask a simple question, though i felt
that by so doing i was lowering myself in the eyes of the lunatic:--

“and why with enoch?”

“because he walked with god.” i could not see the analogy, but did not
like to admit it; so i harked back to what he had denied:--

“so you don’t care about life and you don’t want souls. why not?” i put
my question quickly and somewhat sternly, on purpose to disconcert him.
the effort succeeded; for an instant he unconsciously relapsed into his
old servile manner, bent low before me, and actually fawned upon me as
he replied:--

“i don’t want any souls, indeed, indeed! i don’t. i couldn’t use them if
i had them; they would be no manner of use to me. i couldn’t eat them
or----” he suddenly stopped and the old cunning look spread over his
face, like a wind-sweep on the surface of the water. “and doctor, as to
life, what is it after all? when you’ve got all you require, and you
know that you will never want, that is all. i have friends--good
friends--like you, dr. seward”; this was said with a leer of
inexpressible cunning. “i know that i shall never lack the means of
life!”

i think that through the cloudiness of his insanity he saw some
antagonism in me, for he at once fell back on the last refuge of such as
he--a dogged silence. after a short time i saw that for the present it
was useless to speak to him. he was sulky, and so i came away.

later in the day he sent for me. ordinarily i would not have come
without special reason, but just at present i am so interested in him
that i would gladly make an effort. besides, i am glad to have anything
to help to pass the time. harker is out, following up clues; and so are
lord godalming and quincey. van helsing sits in my study poring over the
record prepared by the harkers; he seems to think that by accurate
knowledge of all details he will light upon some clue. he does not wish
to be disturbed in the work, without cause. i would have taken him with
me to see the patient, only i thought that after his last repulse he
might not care to go again. there was also another reason: renfield
might not speak so freely before a third person as when he and i were
alone.

i found him sitting out in the middle of the floor on his stool, a pose
which is generally indicative of some mental energy on his part. when i
came in, he said at once, as though the question had been waiting on his
lips:--

“what about souls?” it was evident then that my surmise had been
correct. unconscious cerebration was doing its work, even with the
lunatic. i determined to have the matter out. “what about them
yourself?” i asked. he did not reply for a moment but looked all round
him, and up and down, as though he expected to find some inspiration for
an answer.

“i don’t want any souls!” he said in a feeble, apologetic way. the
matter seemed preying on his mind, and so i determined to use it--to “be
cruel only to be kind.” so i said:--

“you like life, and you want life?”

“oh yes! but that is all right; you needn’t worry about that!”

“but,” i asked, “how are we to get the life without getting the soul
also?” this seemed to puzzle him, so i followed it up:--

“a nice time you’ll have some time when you’re flying out there, with
the souls of thousands of flies and spiders and birds and cats buzzing
and twittering and miauing all round you. you’ve got their lives, you
know, and you must put up with their souls!” something seemed to affect
his imagination, for he put his fingers to his ears and shut his eyes,
screwing them up tightly just as a small boy does when his face is being
soaped. there was something pathetic in it that touched me; it also gave
me a lesson, for it seemed that before me was a child--only a child,
though the features were worn, and the stubble on the jaws was white. it
was evident that he was undergoing some process of mental disturbance,
and, knowing how his past moods had interpreted things seemingly foreign
to himself, i thought i would enter into his mind as well as i could and
go with him. the first step was to restore confidence, so i asked him,
speaking pretty loud so that he would hear me through his closed ears:--

“would you like some sugar to get your flies round again?” he seemed to
wake up all at once, and shook his head. with a laugh he replied:--

“not much! flies are poor things, after all!” after a pause he added,
“but i don’t want their souls buzzing round me, all the same.”

“or spiders?” i went on.

“blow spiders! what’s the use of spiders? there isn’t anything in them
to eat or”--he stopped suddenly, as though reminded of a forbidden
topic.

“so, so!” i thought to myself, “this is the second time he has suddenly
stopped at the word ‘drink’; what does it mean?” renfield seemed himself
aware of having made a lapse, for he hurried on, as though to distract
my attention from it:--

“i don’t take any stock at all in such matters. ‘rats and mice and such
small deer,’ as shakespeare has it, ‘chicken-feed of the larder’ they
might be called. i’m past all that sort of nonsense. you might as well
ask a man to eat molecules with a pair of chop-sticks, as to try to
interest me about the lesser carnivora, when i know of what is before
me.”

“i see,” i said. “you want big things that you can make your teeth meet
in? how would you like to breakfast on elephant?”

“what ridiculous nonsense you are talking!” he was getting too wide
awake, so i thought i would press him hard. “i wonder,” i said
reflectively, “what an elephant’s soul is like!”

the effect i desired was obtained, for he at once fell from his
high-horse and became a child again.

“i don’t want an elephant’s soul, or any soul at all!” he said. for a
few moments he sat despondently. suddenly he jumped to his feet, with
his eyes blazing and all the signs of intense cerebral excitement. “to
hell with you and your souls!” he shouted. “why do you plague me about
souls? haven’t i got enough to worry, and pain, and distract me already,
without thinking of souls!” he looked so hostile that i thought he was
in for another homicidal fit, so i blew my whistle. the instant,
however, that i did so he became calm, and said apologetically:--

“forgive me, doctor; i forgot myself. you do not need any help. i am so
worried in my mind that i am apt to be irritable. if you only knew the
problem i have to face, and that i am working out, you would pity, and
tolerate, and pardon me. pray do not put me in a strait-waistcoat. i
want to think and i cannot think freely when my body is confined. i am
sure you will understand!” he had evidently self-control; so when the
attendants came i told them not to mind, and they withdrew. renfield
watched them go; when the door was closed he said, with considerable
dignity and sweetness:--

“dr. seward, you have been very considerate towards me. believe me that
i am very, very grateful to you!” i thought it well to leave him in this
mood, and so i came away. there is certainly something to ponder over in
this man’s state. several points seem to make what the american
interviewer calls “a story,” if one could only get them in proper order.
here they are:--

will not mention “drinking.”

fears the thought of being burdened with the “soul” of anything.

has no dread of wanting “life” in the future.

despises the meaner forms of life altogether, though he dreads being
haunted by their souls.

logically all these things point one way! he has assurance of some kind
that he will acquire some higher life. he dreads the consequence--the
burden of a soul. then it is a human life he looks to!

and the assurance--?

merciful god! the count has been to him, and there is some new scheme of
terror afoot!

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--i went after my round to van helsing and told him my
suspicion. he grew very grave; and, after thinking the matter over for a
while asked me to take him to renfield. i did so. as we came to the door
we heard the lunatic within singing gaily, as he used to do in the time
which now seems so long ago. when we entered we saw with amazement that
he had spread out his sugar as of old; the flies, lethargic with the
autumn, were beginning to buzz into the room. we tried to make him talk
of the subject of our previous conversation, but he would not attend. he
went on with his singing, just as though we had not been present. he had
got a scrap of paper and was folding it into a note-book. we had to come
away as ignorant as we went in.

his is a curious case indeed; we must watch him to-night.


_letter, mitchell, sons and candy to lord godalming._

_“1 october._

“my lord,

“we are at all times only too happy to meet your wishes. we beg, with
regard to the desire of your lordship, expressed by mr. harker on your
behalf, to supply the following information concerning the sale and
purchase of no. 347, piccadilly. the original vendors are the executors
of the late mr. archibald winter-suffield. the purchaser is a foreign
nobleman, count de ville, who effected the purchase himself paying the
purchase money in notes ‘over the counter,’ if your lordship will pardon
us using so vulgar an expression. beyond this we know nothing whatever
of him.

“we are, my lord,

“your lordship’s humble servants,

“mitchell, sons & candy.”


_dr. seward’s diary._

_2 october._--i placed a man in the corridor last night, and told him to
make an accurate note of any sound he might hear from renfield’s room,
and gave him instructions that if there should be anything strange he
was to call me. after dinner, when we had all gathered round the fire
in the study--mrs. harker having gone to bed--we discussed the attempts
and discoveries of the day. harker was the only one who had any result,
and we are in great hopes that his clue may be an important one.

before going to bed i went round to the patient’s room and looked in
through the observation trap. he was sleeping soundly, and his heart
rose and fell with regular respiration.

this morning the man on duty reported to me that a little after midnight
he was restless and kept saying his prayers somewhat loudly. i asked him
if that was all; he replied that it was all he heard. there was
something about his manner so suspicious that i asked him point blank if
he had been asleep. he denied sleep, but admitted to having “dozed” for
a while. it is too bad that men cannot be trusted unless they are
watched.

to-day harker is out following up his clue, and art and quincey are
looking after horses. godalming thinks that it will be well to have
horses always in readiness, for when we get the information which we
seek there will be no time to lose. we must sterilise all the imported
earth between sunrise and sunset; we shall thus catch the count at his
weakest, and without a refuge to fly to. van helsing is off to the
british museum looking up some authorities on ancient medicine. the old
physicians took account of things which their followers do not accept,
and the professor is searching for witch and demon cures which may be
useful to us later.

i sometimes think we must be all mad and that we shall wake to sanity in
strait-waistcoats.

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--we have met again. we seem at last to be on the track, and our
work of to-morrow may be the beginning of the end. i wonder if
renfield’s quiet has anything to do with this. his moods have so
followed the doings of the count, that the coming destruction of the
monster may be carried to him in some subtle way. if we could only get
some hint as to what passed in his mind, between the time of my argument
with him to-day and his resumption of fly-catching, it might afford us a
valuable clue. he is now seemingly quiet for a spell.... is he?---- that
wild yell seemed to come from his room....

       *       *       *       *       *

the attendant came bursting into my room and told me that renfield had
somehow met with some accident. he had heard him yell; and when he went
to him found him lying on his face on the floor, all covered with blood.
i must go at once....




chapter xxi

dr. seward’s diary


_3 october._--let me put down with exactness all that happened, as well
as i can remember it, since last i made an entry. not a detail that i
can recall must be forgotten; in all calmness i must proceed.

when i came to renfield’s room i found him lying on the floor on his
left side in a glittering pool of blood. when i went to move him, it
became at once apparent that he had received some terrible injuries;
there seemed none of that unity of purpose between the parts of the body
which marks even lethargic sanity. as the face was exposed i could see
that it was horribly bruised, as though it had been beaten against the
floor--indeed it was from the face wounds that the pool of blood
originated. the attendant who was kneeling beside the body said to me as
we turned him over:--

“i think, sir, his back is broken. see, both his right arm and leg and
the whole side of his face are paralysed.” how such a thing could have
happened puzzled the attendant beyond measure. he seemed quite
bewildered, and his brows were gathered in as he said:--

“i can’t understand the two things. he could mark his face like that by
beating his own head on the floor. i saw a young woman do it once at the
eversfield asylum before anyone could lay hands on her. and i suppose he
might have broke his neck by falling out of bed, if he got in an awkward
kink. but for the life of me i can’t imagine how the two things
occurred. if his back was broke, he couldn’t beat his head; and if his
face was like that before the fall out of bed, there would be marks of
it.” i said to him:--

“go to dr. van helsing, and ask him to kindly come here at once. i want
him without an instant’s delay.” the man ran off, and within a few
minutes the professor, in his dressing gown and slippers, appeared. when
he saw renfield on the ground, he looked keenly at him a moment, and
then turned to me. i think he recognised my thought in my eyes, for he
said very quietly, manifestly for the ears of the attendant:--

“ah, a sad accident! he will need very careful watching, and much
attention. i shall stay with you myself; but i shall first dress myself.
if you will remain i shall in a few minutes join you.”

the patient was now breathing stertorously and it was easy to see that
he had suffered some terrible injury. van helsing returned with
extraordinary celerity, bearing with him a surgical case. he had
evidently been thinking and had his mind made up; for, almost before he
looked at the patient, he whispered to me:--

“send the attendant away. we must be alone with him when he becomes
conscious, after the operation.” so i said:--

“i think that will do now, simmons. we have done all that we can at
present. you had better go your round, and dr. van helsing will operate.
let me know instantly if there be anything unusual anywhere.”

the man withdrew, and we went into a strict examination of the patient.
the wounds of the face was superficial; the real injury was a depressed
fracture of the skull, extending right up through the motor area. the
professor thought a moment and said:--

“we must reduce the pressure and get back to normal conditions, as far
as can be; the rapidity of the suffusion shows the terrible nature of
his injury. the whole motor area seems affected. the suffusion of the
brain will increase quickly, so we must trephine at once or it may be
too late.” as he was speaking there was a soft tapping at the door. i
went over and opened it and found in the corridor without, arthur and
quincey in pajamas and slippers: the former spoke:--

“i heard your man call up dr. van helsing and tell him of an accident.
so i woke quincey or rather called for him as he was not asleep. things
are moving too quickly and too strangely for sound sleep for any of us
these times. i’ve been thinking that to-morrow night will not see things
as they have been. we’ll have to look back--and forward a little more
than we have done. may we come in?” i nodded, and held the door open
till they had entered; then i closed it again. when quincey saw the
attitude and state of the patient, and noted the horrible pool on the
floor, he said softly:--

“my god! what has happened to him? poor, poor devil!” i told him
briefly, and added that we expected he would recover consciousness after
the operation--for a short time, at all events. he went at once and sat
down on the edge of the bed, with godalming beside him; we all watched
in patience.

“we shall wait,” said van helsing, “just long enough to fix the best
spot for trephining, so that we may most quickly and perfectly remove
the blood clot; for it is evident that the hæmorrhage is increasing.”

the minutes during which we waited passed with fearful slowness. i had a
horrible sinking in my heart, and from van helsing’s face i gathered
that he felt some fear or apprehension as to what was to come. i dreaded
the words that renfield might speak. i was positively afraid to think;
but the conviction of what was coming was on me, as i have read of men
who have heard the death-watch. the poor man’s breathing came in
uncertain gasps. each instant he seemed as though he would open his eyes
and speak; but then would follow a prolonged stertorous breath, and he
would relapse into a more fixed insensibility. inured as i was to sick
beds and death, this suspense grew, and grew upon me. i could almost
hear the beating of my own heart; and the blood surging through my
temples sounded like blows from a hammer. the silence finally became
agonising. i looked at my companions, one after another, and saw from
their flushed faces and damp brows that they were enduring equal
torture. there was a nervous suspense over us all, as though overhead
some dread bell would peal out powerfully when we should least expect
it.

at last there came a time when it was evident that the patient was
sinking fast; he might die at any moment. i looked up at the professor
and caught his eyes fixed on mine. his face was sternly set as he
spoke:--

“there is no time to lose. his words may be worth many lives; i have
been thinking so, as i stood here. it may be there is a soul at stake!
we shall operate just above the ear.”

without another word he made the operation. for a few moments the
breathing continued to be stertorous. then there came a breath so
prolonged that it seemed as though it would tear open his chest.
suddenly his eyes opened, and became fixed in a wild, helpless stare.
this was continued for a few moments; then it softened into a glad
surprise, and from the lips came a sigh of relief. he moved
convulsively, and as he did so, said:--

“i’ll be quiet, doctor. tell them to take off the strait-waistcoat. i
have had a terrible dream, and it has left me so weak that i cannot
move. what’s wrong with my face? it feels all swollen, and it smarts
dreadfully.” he tried to turn his head; but even with the effort his
eyes seemed to grow glassy again so i gently put it back. then van
helsing said in a quiet grave tone:--

“tell us your dream, mr. renfield.” as he heard the voice his face
brightened, through its mutilation, and he said:--

“that is dr. van helsing. how good it is of you to be here. give me some
water, my lips are dry; and i shall try to tell you. i dreamed”--he
stopped and seemed fainting, i called quietly to quincey--“the
brandy--it is in my study--quick!” he flew and returned with a glass,
the decanter of brandy and a carafe of water. we moistened the parched
lips, and the patient quickly revived. it seemed, however, that his poor
injured brain had been working in the interval, for, when he was quite
conscious, he looked at me piercingly with an agonised confusion which i
shall never forget, and said:--

“i must not deceive myself; it was no dream, but all a grim reality.”
then his eyes roved round the room; as they caught sight of the two
figures sitting patiently on the edge of the bed he went on:--

“if i were not sure already, i would know from them.” for an instant his
eyes closed--not with pain or sleep but voluntarily, as though he were
bringing all his faculties to bear; when he opened them he said,
hurriedly, and with more energy than he had yet displayed:--

“quick, doctor, quick. i am dying! i feel that i have but a few minutes;
and then i must go back to death--or worse! wet my lips with brandy
again. i have something that i must say before i die; or before my poor
crushed brain dies anyhow. thank you! it was that night after you left
me, when i implored you to let me go away. i couldn’t speak then, for i
felt my tongue was tied; but i was as sane then, except in that way, as
i am now. i was in an agony of despair for a long time after you left
me; it seemed hours. then there came a sudden peace to me. my brain
seemed to become cool again, and i realised where i was. i heard the
dogs bark behind our house, but not where he was!” as he spoke, van
helsing’s eyes never blinked, but his hand came out and met mine and
gripped it hard. he did not, however, betray himself; he nodded slightly
and said: “go on,” in a low voice. renfield proceeded:--

“he came up to the window in the mist, as i had seen him often before;
but he was solid then--not a ghost, and his eyes were fierce like a
man’s when angry. he was laughing with his red mouth; the sharp white
teeth glinted in the moonlight when he turned to look back over the belt
of trees, to where the dogs were barking. i wouldn’t ask him to come in
at first, though i knew he wanted to--just as he had wanted all along.
then he began promising me things--not in words but by doing them.” he
was interrupted by a word from the professor:--

“how?”

“by making them happen; just as he used to send in the flies when the
sun was shining. great big fat ones with steel and sapphire on their
wings; and big moths, in the night, with skull and cross-bones on their
backs.” van helsing nodded to him as he whispered to me unconsciously:--

“the _acherontia aitetropos of the sphinges_--what you call the
‘death’s-head moth’?” the patient went on without stopping.

“then he began to whisper: ‘rats, rats, rats! hundreds, thousands,
millions of them, and every one a life; and dogs to eat them, and cats
too. all lives! all red blood, with years of life in it; and not merely
buzzing flies!’ i laughed at him, for i wanted to see what he could do.
then the dogs howled, away beyond the dark trees in his house. he
beckoned me to the window. i got up and looked out, and he raised his
hands, and seemed to call out without using any words. a dark mass
spread over the grass, coming on like the shape of a flame of fire; and
then he moved the mist to the right and left, and i could see that there
were thousands of rats with their eyes blazing red--like his, only
smaller. he held up his hand, and they all stopped; and i thought he
seemed to be saying: ‘all these lives will i give you, ay, and many more
and greater, through countless ages, if you will fall down and worship
me!’ and then a red cloud, like the colour of blood, seemed to close
over my eyes; and before i knew what i was doing, i found myself opening
the sash and saying to him: ‘come in, lord and master!’ the rats were
all gone, but he slid into the room through the sash, though it was only
open an inch wide--just as the moon herself has often come in through
the tiniest crack and has stood before me in all her size and
splendour.”

his voice was weaker, so i moistened his lips with the brandy again, and
he continued; but it seemed as though his memory had gone on working in
the interval for his story was further advanced. i was about to call him
back to the point, but van helsing whispered to me: “let him go on. do
not interrupt him; he cannot go back, and maybe could not proceed at all
if once he lost the thread of his thought.” he proceeded:--

“all day i waited to hear from him, but he did not send me anything, not
even a blow-fly, and when the moon got up i was pretty angry with him.
when he slid in through the window, though it was shut, and did not even
knock, i got mad with him. he sneered at me, and his white face looked
out of the mist with his red eyes gleaming, and he went on as though he
owned the whole place, and i was no one. he didn’t even smell the same
as he went by me. i couldn’t hold him. i thought that, somehow, mrs.
harker had come into the room.”

the two men sitting on the bed stood up and came over, standing behind
him so that he could not see them, but where they could hear better.
they were both silent, but the professor started and quivered; his face,
however, grew grimmer and sterner still. renfield went on without
noticing:--

“when mrs. harker came in to see me this afternoon she wasn’t the same;
it was like tea after the teapot had been watered.” here we all moved,
but no one said a word; he went on:--

“i didn’t know that she was here till she spoke; and she didn’t look the
same. i don’t care for the pale people; i like them with lots of blood
in them, and hers had all seemed to have run out. i didn’t think of it
at the time; but when she went away i began to think, and it made me mad
to know that he had been taking the life out of her.” i could feel that
the rest quivered, as i did, but we remained otherwise still. “so when
he came to-night i was ready for him. i saw the mist stealing in, and i
grabbed it tight. i had heard that madmen have unnatural strength; and
as i knew i was a madman--at times anyhow--i resolved to use my power.
ay, and he felt it too, for he had to come out of the mist to struggle
with me. i held tight; and i thought i was going to win, for i didn’t
mean him to take any more of her life, till i saw his eyes. they burned
into me, and my strength became like water. he slipped through it, and
when i tried to cling to him, he raised me up and flung me down. there
was a red cloud before me, and a noise like thunder, and the mist seemed
to steal away under the door.” his voice was becoming fainter and his
breath more stertorous. van helsing stood up instinctively.

“we know the worst now,” he said. “he is here, and we know his purpose.
it may not be too late. let us be armed--the same as we were the other
night, but lose no time; there is not an instant to spare.” there was no
need to put our fear, nay our conviction, into words--we shared them in
common. we all hurried and took from our rooms the same things that we
had when we entered the count’s house. the professor had his ready, and
as we met in the corridor he pointed to them significantly as he said:--

“they never leave me; and they shall not till this unhappy business is
over. be wise also, my friends. it is no common enemy that we deal with.
alas! alas! that that dear madam mina should suffer!” he stopped; his
voice was breaking, and i do not know if rage or terror predominated in
my own heart.

outside the harkers’ door we paused. art and quincey held back, and the
latter said:--

“should we disturb her?”

“we must,” said van helsing grimly. “if the door be locked, i shall
break it in.”

“may it not frighten her terribly? it is unusual to break into a lady’s
room!”

van helsing said solemnly, “you are always right; but this is life and
death. all chambers are alike to the doctor; and even were they not they
are all as one to me to-night. friend john, when i turn the handle, if
the door does not open, do you put your shoulder down and shove; and you
too, my friends. now!”

he turned the handle as he spoke, but the door did not yield. we threw
ourselves against it; with a crash it burst open, and we almost fell
headlong into the room. the professor did actually fall, and i saw
across him as he gathered himself up from hands and knees. what i saw
appalled me. i felt my hair rise like bristles on the back of my neck,
and my heart seemed to stand still.

the moonlight was so bright that through the thick yellow blind the room
was light enough to see. on the bed beside the window lay jonathan
harker, his face flushed and breathing heavily as though in a stupor.
kneeling on the near edge of the bed facing outwards was the white-clad
figure of his wife. by her side stood a tall, thin man, clad in black.
his face was turned from us, but the instant we saw we all recognised
the count--in every way, even to the scar on his forehead. with his left
hand he held both mrs. harker’s hands, keeping them away with her arms
at full tension; his right hand gripped her by the back of the neck,
forcing her face down on his bosom. her white nightdress was smeared
with blood, and a thin stream trickled down the man’s bare breast which
was shown by his torn-open dress. the attitude of the two had a terrible
resemblance to a child forcing a kitten’s nose into a saucer of milk to
compel it to drink. as we burst into the room, the count turned his
face, and the hellish look that i had heard described seemed to leap
into it. his eyes flamed red with devilish passion; the great nostrils
of the white aquiline nose opened wide and quivered at the edge; and the
white sharp teeth, behind the full lips of the blood-dripping mouth,
champed together like those of a wild beast. with a wrench, which threw
his victim back upon the bed as though hurled from a height, he turned
and sprang at us. but by this time the professor had gained his feet,
and was holding towards him the envelope which contained the sacred
wafer. the count suddenly stopped, just as poor lucy had done outside
the tomb, and cowered back. further and further back he cowered, as we,
lifting our crucifixes, advanced. the moonlight suddenly failed, as a
great black cloud sailed across the sky; and when the gaslight sprang up
under quincey’s match, we saw nothing but a faint vapour. this, as we
looked, trailed under the door, which with the recoil from its bursting
open, had swung back to its old position. van helsing, art, and i moved
forward to mrs. harker, who by this time had drawn her breath and with
it had given a scream so wild, so ear-piercing, so despairing that it
seems to me now that it will ring in my ears till my dying day. for a
few seconds she lay in her helpless attitude and disarray. her face was
ghastly, with a pallor which was accentuated by the blood which smeared
her lips and cheeks and chin; from her throat trickled a thin stream of
blood; her eyes were mad with terror. then she put before her face her
poor crushed hands, which bore on their whiteness the red mark of the
count’s terrible grip, and from behind them came a low desolate wail
which made the terrible scream seem only the quick expression of an
endless grief. van helsing stepped forward and drew the coverlet gently
over her body, whilst art, after looking at her face for an instant
despairingly, ran out of the room. van helsing whispered to me:--

“jonathan is in a stupor such as we know the vampire can produce. we can
do nothing with poor madam mina for a few moments till she recovers
herself; i must wake him!” he dipped the end of a towel in cold water
and with it began to flick him on the face, his wife all the while
holding her face between her hands and sobbing in a way that was
heart-breaking to hear. i raised the blind, and looked out of the
window. there was much moonshine; and as i looked i could see quincey
morris run across the lawn and hide himself in the shadow of a great
yew-tree. it puzzled me to think why he was doing this; but at the
instant i heard harker’s quick exclamation as he woke to partial
consciousness, and turned to the bed. on his face, as there might well
be, was a look of wild amazement. he seemed dazed for a few seconds, and
then full consciousness seemed to burst upon him all at once, and he
started up. his wife was aroused by the quick movement, and turned to
him with her arms stretched out, as though to embrace him; instantly,
however, she drew them in again, and putting her elbows together, held
her hands before her face, and shuddered till the bed beneath her shook.

“in god’s name what does this mean?” harker cried out. “dr. seward, dr.
van helsing, what is it? what has happened? what is wrong? mina, dear,
what is it? what does that blood mean? my god, my god! has it come to
this!” and, raising himself to his knees, he beat his hands wildly
together. “good god help us! help her! oh, help her!” with a quick
movement he jumped from bed, and began to pull on his clothes,--all the
man in him awake at the need for instant exertion. “what has happened?
tell me all about it!” he cried without pausing. “dr. van helsing, you
love mina, i know. oh, do something to save her. it cannot have gone too
far yet. guard her while i look for _him_!” his wife, through her terror
and horror and distress, saw some sure danger to him: instantly
forgetting her own grief, she seized hold of him and cried out:--

“no! no! jonathan, you must not leave me. i have suffered enough
to-night, god knows, without the dread of his harming you. you must stay
with me. stay with these friends who will watch over you!” her
expression became frantic as she spoke; and, he yielding to her, she
pulled him down sitting on the bed side, and clung to him fiercely.

van helsing and i tried to calm them both. the professor held up his
little golden crucifix, and said with wonderful calmness:--

“do not fear, my dear. we are here; and whilst this is close to you no
foul thing can approach. you are safe for to-night; and we must be calm
and take counsel together.” she shuddered and was silent, holding down
her head on her husband’s breast. when she raised it, his white
night-robe was stained with blood where her lips had touched, and where
the thin open wound in her neck had sent forth drops. the instant she
saw it she drew back, with a low wail, and whispered, amidst choking
sobs:--

“unclean, unclean! i must touch him or kiss him no more. oh, that it
should be that it is i who am now his worst enemy, and whom he may have
most cause to fear.” to this he spoke out resolutely:--

“nonsense, mina. it is a shame to me to hear such a word. i would not
hear it of you; and i shall not hear it from you. may god judge me by my
deserts, and punish me with more bitter suffering than even this hour,
if by any act or will of mine anything ever come between us!” he put out
his arms and folded her to his breast; and for a while she lay there
sobbing. he looked at us over her bowed head, with eyes that blinked
damply above his quivering nostrils; his mouth was set as steel. after a
while her sobs became less frequent and more faint, and then he said to
me, speaking with a studied calmness which i felt tried his nervous
power to the utmost:--

“and now, dr. seward, tell me all about it. too well i know the broad
fact; tell me all that has been.” i told him exactly what had happened,
and he listened with seeming impassiveness; but his nostrils twitched
and his eyes blazed as i told how the ruthless hands of the count had
held his wife in that terrible and horrid position, with her mouth to
the open wound in his breast. it interested me, even at that moment, to
see, that, whilst the face of white set passion worked convulsively over
the bowed head, the hands tenderly and lovingly stroked the ruffled
hair. just as i had finished, quincey and godalming knocked at the door.
they entered in obedience to our summons. van helsing looked at me
questioningly. i understood him to mean if we were to take advantage of
their coming to divert if possible the thoughts of the unhappy husband
and wife from each other and from themselves; so on nodding acquiescence
to him he asked them what they had seen or done. to which lord godalming
answered:--

“i could not see him anywhere in the passage, or in any of our rooms. i
looked in the study but, though he had been there, he had gone. he had,
however----” he stopped suddenly, looking at the poor drooping figure on
the bed. van helsing said gravely:--

“go on, friend arthur. we want here no more concealments. our hope now
is in knowing all. tell freely!” so art went on:--

“he had been there, and though it could only have been for a few
seconds, he made rare hay of the place. all the manuscript had been
burned, and the blue flames were flickering amongst the white ashes; the
cylinders of your phonograph too were thrown on the fire, and the wax
had helped the flames.” here i interrupted. “thank god there is the
other copy in the safe!” his face lit for a moment, but fell again as he
went on: “i ran downstairs then, but could see no sign of him. i looked
into renfield’s room; but there was no trace there except----!” again he
paused. “go on,” said harker hoarsely; so he bowed his head and
moistening his lips with his tongue, added: “except that the poor fellow
is dead.” mrs. harker raised her head, looking from one to the other of
us she said solemnly:--

“god’s will be done!” i could not but feel that art was keeping back
something; but, as i took it that it was with a purpose, i said nothing.
van helsing turned to morris and asked:--

“and you, friend quincey, have you any to tell?”

“a little,” he answered. “it may be much eventually, but at present i
can’t say. i thought it well to know if possible where the count would
go when he left the house. i did not see him; but i saw a bat rise from
renfield’s window, and flap westward. i expected to see him in some
shape go back to carfax; but he evidently sought some other lair. he
will not be back to-night; for the sky is reddening in the east, and the
dawn is close. we must work to-morrow!”

he said the latter words through his shut teeth. for a space of perhaps
a couple of minutes there was silence, and i could fancy that i could
hear the sound of our hearts beating; then van helsing said, placing his
hand very tenderly on mrs. harker’s head:--

“and now, madam mina--poor, dear, dear madam mina--tell us exactly what
happened. god knows that i do not want that you be pained; but it is
need that we know all. for now more than ever has all work to be done
quick and sharp, and in deadly earnest. the day is close to us that must
end all, if it may be so; and now is the chance that we may live and
learn.”

the poor, dear lady shivered, and i could see the tension of her nerves
as she clasped her husband closer to her and bent her head lower and
lower still on his breast. then she raised her head proudly, and held
out one hand to van helsing who took it in his, and, after stooping and
kissing it reverently, held it fast. the other hand was locked in that
of her husband, who held his other arm thrown round her protectingly.
after a pause in which she was evidently ordering her thoughts, she
began:--

“i took the sleeping draught which you had so kindly given me, but for a
long time it did not act. i seemed to become more wakeful, and myriads
of horrible fancies began to crowd in upon my mind--all of them
connected with death, and vampires; with blood, and pain, and trouble.”
her husband involuntarily groaned as she turned to him and said
lovingly: “do not fret, dear. you must be brave and strong, and help me
through the horrible task. if you only knew what an effort it is to me
to tell of this fearful thing at all, you would understand how much i
need your help. well, i saw i must try to help the medicine to its work
with my will, if it was to do me any good, so i resolutely set myself to
sleep. sure enough sleep must soon have come to me, for i remember no
more. jonathan coming in had not waked me, for he lay by my side when
next i remember. there was in the room the same thin white mist that i
had before noticed. but i forget now if you know of this; you will find
it in my diary which i shall show you later. i felt the same vague
terror which had come to me before and the same sense of some presence.
i turned to wake jonathan, but found that he slept so soundly that it
seemed as if it was he who had taken the sleeping draught, and not i. i
tried, but i could not wake him. this caused me a great fear, and i
looked around terrified. then indeed, my heart sank within me: beside
the bed, as if he had stepped out of the mist--or rather as if the mist
had turned into his figure, for it had entirely disappeared--stood a
tall, thin man, all in black. i knew him at once from the description of
the others. the waxen face; the high aquiline nose, on which the light
fell in a thin white line; the parted red lips, with the sharp white
teeth showing between; and the red eyes that i had seemed to see in the
sunset on the windows of st. mary’s church at whitby. i knew, too, the
red scar on his forehead where jonathan had struck him. for an instant
my heart stood still, and i would have screamed out, only that i was
paralysed. in the pause he spoke in a sort of keen, cutting whisper,
pointing as he spoke to jonathan:--

“‘silence! if you make a sound i shall take him and dash his brains out
before your very eyes.’ i was appalled and was too bewildered to do or
say anything. with a mocking smile, he placed one hand upon my shoulder
and, holding me tight, bared my throat with the other, saying as he did
so, ‘first, a little refreshment to reward my exertions. you may as well
be quiet; it is not the first time, or the second, that your veins have
appeased my thirst!’ i was bewildered, and, strangely enough, i did not
want to hinder him. i suppose it is a part of the horrible curse that
such is, when his touch is on his victim. and oh, my god, my god, pity
me! he placed his reeking lips upon my throat!” her husband groaned
again. she clasped his hand harder, and looked at him pityingly, as if
he were the injured one, and went on:--

“i felt my strength fading away, and i was in a half swoon. how long
this horrible thing lasted i know not; but it seemed that a long time
must have passed before he took his foul, awful, sneering mouth away. i
saw it drip with the fresh blood!” the remembrance seemed for a while to
overpower her, and she drooped and would have sunk down but for her
husband’s sustaining arm. with a great effort she recovered herself and
went on:--

“then he spoke to me mockingly, ‘and so you, like the others, would play
your brains against mine. you would help these men to hunt me and
frustrate me in my designs! you know now, and they know in part already,
and will know in full before long, what it is to cross my path. they
should have kept their energies for use closer to home. whilst they
played wits against me--against me who commanded nations, and intrigued
for them, and fought for them, hundreds of years before they were
born--i was countermining them. and you, their best beloved one, are now
to me, flesh of my flesh; blood of my blood; kin of my kin; my bountiful
wine-press for a while; and shall be later on my companion and my
helper. you shall be avenged in turn; for not one of them but shall
minister to your needs. but as yet you are to be punished for what you
have done. you have aided in thwarting me; now you shall come to my
call. when my brain says “come!” to you, you shall cross land or sea to
do my bidding; and to that end this!’ with that he pulled open his
shirt, and with his long sharp nails opened a vein in his breast. when
the blood began to spurt out, he took my hands in one of his, holding
them tight, and with the other seized my neck and pressed my mouth to
the wound, so that i must either suffocate or swallow some of the---- oh
my god! my god! what have i done? what have i done to deserve such a
fate, i who have tried to walk in meekness and righteousness all my
days. god pity me! look down on a poor soul in worse than mortal peril;
and in mercy pity those to whom she is dear!” then she began to rub her
lips as though to cleanse them from pollution.

as she was telling her terrible story, the eastern sky began to quicken,
and everything became more and more clear. harker was still and quiet;
but over his face, as the awful narrative went on, came a grey look
which deepened and deepened in the morning light, till when the first
red streak of the coming dawn shot up, the flesh stood darkly out
against the whitening hair.

we have arranged that one of us is to stay within call of the unhappy
pair till we can meet together and arrange about taking action.

of this i am sure: the sun rises to-day on no more miserable house in
all the great round of its daily course.




chapter xxii

jonathan harker’s journal


_3 october._--as i must do something or go mad, i write this diary. it
is now six o’clock, and we are to meet in the study in half an hour and
take something to eat; for dr. van helsing and dr. seward are agreed
that if we do not eat we cannot work our best. our best will be, god
knows, required to-day. i must keep writing at every chance, for i dare
not stop to think. all, big and little, must go down; perhaps at the end
the little things may teach us most. the teaching, big or little, could
not have landed mina or me anywhere worse than we are to-day. however,
we must trust and hope. poor mina told me just now, with the tears
running down her dear cheeks, that it is in trouble and trial that our
faith is tested--that we must keep on trusting; and that god will aid us
up to the end. the end! oh my god! what end?... to work! to work!

when dr. van helsing and dr. seward had come back from seeing poor
renfield, we went gravely into what was to be done. first, dr. seward
told us that when he and dr. van helsing had gone down to the room below
they had found renfield lying on the floor, all in a heap. his face was
all bruised and crushed in, and the bones of the neck were broken.

dr. seward asked the attendant who was on duty in the passage if he had
heard anything. he said that he had been sitting down--he confessed to
half dozing--when he heard loud voices in the room, and then renfield
had called out loudly several times, “god! god! god!” after that there
was a sound of falling, and when he entered the room he found him lying
on the floor, face down, just as the doctors had seen him. van helsing
asked if he had heard “voices” or “a voice,” and he said he could not
say; that at first it had seemed to him as if there were two, but as
there was no one in the room it could have been only one. he could swear
to it, if required, that the word “god” was spoken by the patient. dr.
seward said to us, when we were alone, that he did not wish to go into
the matter; the question of an inquest had to be considered, and it
would never do to put forward the truth, as no one would believe it. as
it was, he thought that on the attendant’s evidence he could give a
certificate of death by misadventure in falling from bed. in case the
coroner should demand it, there would be a formal inquest, necessarily
to the same result.

when the question began to be discussed as to what should be our next
step, the very first thing we decided was that mina should be in full
confidence; that nothing of any sort--no matter how painful--should be
kept from her. she herself agreed as to its wisdom, and it was pitiful
to see her so brave and yet so sorrowful, and in such a depth of
despair. “there must be no concealment,” she said, “alas! we have had
too much already. and besides there is nothing in all the world that can
give me more pain than i have already endured--than i suffer now!
whatever may happen, it must be of new hope or of new courage to me!”
van helsing was looking at her fixedly as she spoke, and said, suddenly
but quietly:--

“but dear madam mina, are you not afraid; not for yourself, but for
others from yourself, after what has happened?” her face grew set in its
lines, but her eyes shone with the devotion of a martyr as she
answered:--

“ah no! for my mind is made up!”

“to what?” he asked gently, whilst we were all very still; for each in
our own way we had a sort of vague idea of what she meant. her answer
came with direct simplicity, as though she were simply stating a fact:--

“because if i find in myself--and i shall watch keenly for it--a sign of
harm to any that i love, i shall die!”

“you would not kill yourself?” he asked, hoarsely.

“i would; if there were no friend who loved me, who would save me such a
pain, and so desperate an effort!” she looked at him meaningly as she
spoke. he was sitting down; but now he rose and came close to her and
put his hand on her head as he said solemnly:

“my child, there is such an one if it were for your good. for myself i
could hold it in my account with god to find such an euthanasia for you,
even at this moment if it were best. nay, were it safe! but my
child----” for a moment he seemed choked, and a great sob rose in his
throat; he gulped it down and went on:--

“there are here some who would stand between you and death. you must not
die. you must not die by any hand; but least of all by your own. until
the other, who has fouled your sweet life, is true dead you must not
die; for if he is still with the quick un-dead, your death would make
you even as he is. no, you must live! you must struggle and strive to
live, though death would seem a boon unspeakable. you must fight death
himself, though he come to you in pain or in joy; by the day, or the
night; in safety or in peril! on your living soul i charge you that you
do not die--nay, nor think of death--till this great evil be past.” the
poor dear grew white as death, and shock and shivered, as i have seen a
quicksand shake and shiver at the incoming of the tide. we were all
silent; we could do nothing. at length she grew more calm and turning to
him said, sweetly, but oh! so sorrowfully, as she held out her hand:--

“i promise you, my dear friend, that if god will let me live, i shall
strive to do so; till, if it may be in his good time, this horror may
have passed away from me.” she was so good and brave that we all felt
that our hearts were strengthened to work and endure for her, and we
began to discuss what we were to do. i told her that she was to have all
the papers in the safe, and all the papers or diaries and phonographs we
might hereafter use; and was to keep the record as she had done before.
she was pleased with the prospect of anything to do--if “pleased” could
be used in connection with so grim an interest.

as usual van helsing had thought ahead of everyone else, and was
prepared with an exact ordering of our work.

“it is perhaps well,” he said, “that at our meeting after our visit to
carfax we decided not to do anything with the earth-boxes that lay
there. had we done so, the count must have guessed our purpose, and
would doubtless have taken measures in advance to frustrate such an
effort with regard to the others; but now he does not know our
intentions. nay, more, in all probability, he does not know that such a
power exists to us as can sterilise his lairs, so that he cannot use
them as of old. we are now so much further advanced in our knowledge as
to their disposition that, when we have examined the house in
piccadilly, we may track the very last of them. to-day, then, is ours;
and in it rests our hope. the sun that rose on our sorrow this morning
guards us in its course. until it sets to-night, that monster must
retain whatever form he now has. he is confined within the limitations
of his earthly envelope. he cannot melt into thin air nor disappear
through cracks or chinks or crannies. if he go through a doorway, he
must open the door like a mortal. and so we have this day to hunt out
all his lairs and sterilise them. so we shall, if we have not yet catch
him and destroy him, drive him to bay in some place where the catching
and the destroying shall be, in time, sure.” here i started up for i
could not contain myself at the thought that the minutes and seconds so
preciously laden with mina’s life and happiness were flying from us,
since whilst we talked action was impossible. but van helsing held up
his hand warningly. “nay, friend jonathan,” he said, “in this, the
quickest way home is the longest way, so your proverb say. we shall all
act and act with desperate quick, when the time has come. but think, in
all probable the key of the situation is in that house in piccadilly.
the count may have many houses which he has bought. of them he will have
deeds of purchase, keys and other things. he will have paper that he
write on; he will have his book of cheques. there are many belongings
that he must have somewhere; why not in this place so central, so quiet,
where he come and go by the front or the back at all hour, when in the
very vast of the traffic there is none to notice. we shall go there and
search that house; and when we learn what it holds, then we do what our
friend arthur call, in his phrases of hunt ‘stop the earths’ and so we
run down our old fox--so? is it not?”

“then let us come at once,” i cried, “we are wasting the precious,
precious time!” the professor did not move, but simply said:--

“and how are we to get into that house in piccadilly?”

“any way!” i cried. “we shall break in if need be.”

“and your police; where will they be, and what will they say?”

i was staggered; but i knew that if he wished to delay he had a good
reason for it. so i said, as quietly as i could:--

“don’t wait more than need be; you know, i am sure, what torture i am
in.”

“ah, my child, that i do; and indeed there is no wish of me to add to
your anguish. but just think, what can we do, until all the world be at
movement. then will come our time. i have thought and thought, and it
seems to me that the simplest way is the best of all. now we wish to get
into the house, but we have no key; is it not so?” i nodded.

“now suppose that you were, in truth, the owner of that house, and could
not still get in; and think there was to you no conscience of the
housebreaker, what would you do?”

“i should get a respectable locksmith, and set him to work to pick the
lock for me.”

“and your police, they would interfere, would they not?”

“oh, no! not if they knew the man was properly employed.”

“then,” he looked at me as keenly as he spoke, “all that is in doubt is
the conscience of the employer, and the belief of your policemen as to
whether or no that employer has a good conscience or a bad one. your
police must indeed be zealous men and clever--oh, so clever!--in reading
the heart, that they trouble themselves in such matter. no, no, my
friend jonathan, you go take the lock off a hundred empty house in this
your london, or of any city in the world; and if you do it as such
things are rightly done, and at the time such things are rightly done,
no one will interfere. i have read of a gentleman who owned a so fine
house in london, and when he went for months of summer to switzerland
and lock up his house, some burglar came and broke window at back and
got in. then he went and made open the shutters in front and walk out
and in through the door, before the very eyes of the police. then he
have an auction in that house, and advertise it, and put up big notice;
and when the day come he sell off by a great auctioneer all the goods of
that other man who own them. then he go to a builder, and he sell him
that house, making an agreement that he pull it down and take all away
within a certain time. and your police and other authority help him all
they can. and when that owner come back from his holiday in switzerland
he find only an empty hole where his house had been. this was all done
_en règle_; and in our work we shall be _en règle_ too. we shall not go
so early that the policemen who have then little to think of, shall deem
it strange; but we shall go after ten o’clock, when there are many
about, and such things would be done were we indeed owners of the
house.”

i could not but see how right he was and the terrible despair of mina’s
face became relaxed a thought; there was hope in such good counsel. van
helsing went on:--

“when once within that house we may find more clues; at any rate some of
us can remain there whilst the rest find the other places where there be
more earth-boxes--at bermondsey and mile end.”

lord godalming stood up. “i can be of some use here,” he said. “i shall
wire to my people to have horses and carriages where they will be most
convenient.”

“look here, old fellow,” said morris, “it is a capital idea to have all
ready in case we want to go horsebacking; but don’t you think that one
of your snappy carriages with its heraldic adornments in a byway of
walworth or mile end would attract too much attention for our purposes?
it seems to me that we ought to take cabs when we go south or east; and
even leave them somewhere near the neighbourhood we are going to.”

“friend quincey is right!” said the professor. “his head is what you
call in plane with the horizon. it is a difficult thing that we go to
do, and we do not want no peoples to watch us if so it may.”

mina took a growing interest in everything and i was rejoiced to see
that the exigency of affairs was helping her to forget for a time the
terrible experience of the night. she was very, very pale--almost
ghastly, and so thin that her lips were drawn away, showing her teeth in
somewhat of prominence. i did not mention this last, lest it should give
her needless pain; but it made my blood run cold in my veins to think of
what had occurred with poor lucy when the count had sucked her blood. as
yet there was no sign of the teeth growing sharper; but the time as yet
was short, and there was time for fear.

when we came to the discussion of the sequence of our efforts and of the
disposition of our forces, there were new sources of doubt. it was
finally agreed that before starting for piccadilly we should destroy the
count’s lair close at hand. in case he should find it out too soon, we
should thus be still ahead of him in our work of destruction; and his
presence in his purely material shape, and at his weakest, might give us
some new clue.

as to the disposal of forces, it was suggested by the professor that,
after our visit to carfax, we should all enter the house in piccadilly;
that the two doctors and i should remain there, whilst lord godalming
and quincey found the lairs at walworth and mile end and destroyed them.
it was possible, if not likely, the professor urged, that the count
might appear in piccadilly during the day, and that if so we might be
able to cope with him then and there. at any rate, we might be able to
follow him in force. to this plan i strenuously objected, and so far as
my going was concerned, for i said that i intended to stay and protect
mina, i thought that my mind was made up on the subject; but mina would
not listen to my objection. she said that there might be some law matter
in which i could be useful; that amongst the count’s papers might be
some clue which i could understand out of my experience in transylvania;
and that, as it was, all the strength we could muster was required to
cope with the count’s extraordinary power. i had to give in, for mina’s
resolution was fixed; she said that it was the last hope for _her_ that
we should all work together. “as for me,” she said, “i have no fear.
things have been as bad as they can be; and whatever may happen must
have in it some element of hope or comfort. go, my husband! god can, if
he wishes it, guard me as well alone as with any one present.” so i
started up crying out: “then in god’s name let us come at once, for we
are losing time. the count may come to piccadilly earlier than we
think.”

“not so!” said van helsing, holding up his hand.

“but why?” i asked.

“do you forget,” he said, with actually a smile, “that last night he
banqueted heavily, and will sleep late?”

did i forget! shall i ever--can i ever! can any of us ever forget that
terrible scene! mina struggled hard to keep her brave countenance; but
the pain overmastered her and she put her hands before her face, and
shuddered whilst she moaned. van helsing had not intended to recall her
frightful experience. he had simply lost sight of her and her part in
the affair in his intellectual effort. when it struck him what he said,
he was horrified at his thoughtlessness and tried to comfort her. “oh,
madam mina,” he said, “dear, dear madam mina, alas! that i of all who so
reverence you should have said anything so forgetful. these stupid old
lips of mine and this stupid old head do not deserve so; but you will
forget it, will you not?” he bent low beside her as he spoke; she took
his hand, and looking at him through her tears, said hoarsely:--

“no, i shall not forget, for it is well that i remember; and with it i
have so much in memory of you that is sweet, that i take it all
together. now, you must all be going soon. breakfast is ready, and we
must all eat that we may be strong.”

breakfast was a strange meal to us all. we tried to be cheerful and
encourage each other, and mina was the brightest and most cheerful of
us. when it was over, van helsing stood up and said:--

“now, my dear friends, we go forth to our terrible enterprise. are we
all armed, as we were on that night when first we visited our enemy’s
lair; armed against ghostly as well as carnal attack?” we all assured
him. “then it is well. now, madam mina, you are in any case _quite_ safe
here until the sunset; and before then we shall return--if---- we shall
return! but before we go let me see you armed against personal attack. i
have myself, since you came down, prepared your chamber by the placing
of things of which we know, so that he may not enter. now let me guard
yourself. on your forehead i touch this piece of sacred wafer in the
name of the father, the son, and----”

there was a fearful scream which almost froze our hearts to hear. as he
had placed the wafer on mina’s forehead, it had seared it--had burned
into the flesh as though it had been a piece of white-hot metal. my poor
darling’s brain had told her the significance of the fact as quickly as
her nerves received the pain of it; and the two so overwhelmed her that
her overwrought nature had its voice in that dreadful scream. but the
words to her thought came quickly; the echo of the scream had not ceased
to ring on the air when there came the reaction, and she sank on her
knees on the floor in an agony of abasement. pulling her beautiful hair
over her face, as the leper of old his mantle, she wailed out:--

“unclean! unclean! even the almighty shuns my polluted flesh! i must
bear this mark of shame upon my forehead until the judgment day.” they
all paused. i had thrown myself beside her in an agony of helpless
grief, and putting my arms around held her tight. for a few minutes our
sorrowful hearts beat together, whilst the friends around us turned away
their eyes that ran tears silently. then van helsing turned and said
gravely; so gravely that i could not help feeling that he was in some
way inspired, and was stating things outside himself:--

“it may be that you may have to bear that mark till god himself see fit,
as he most surely shall, on the judgment day, to redress all wrongs of
the earth and of his children that he has placed thereon. and oh, madam
mina, my dear, my dear, may we who love you be there to see, when that
red scar, the sign of god’s knowledge of what has been, shall pass away,
and leave your forehead as pure as the heart we know. for so surely as
we live, that scar shall pass away when god sees right to lift the
burden that is hard upon us. till then we bear our cross, as his son did
in obedience to his will. it may be that we are chosen instruments of
his good pleasure, and that we ascend to his bidding as that other
through stripes and shame; through tears and blood; through doubts and
fears, and all that makes the difference between god and man.”

there was hope in his words, and comfort; and they made for resignation.
mina and i both felt so, and simultaneously we each took one of the old
man’s hands and bent over and kissed it. then without a word we all
knelt down together, and, all holding hands, swore to be true to each
other. we men pledged ourselves to raise the veil of sorrow from the
head of her whom, each in his own way, we loved; and we prayed for help
and guidance in the terrible task which lay before us.

it was then time to start. so i said farewell to mina, a parting which
neither of us shall forget to our dying day; and we set out.

to one thing i have made up my mind: if we find out that mina must be a
vampire in the end, then she shall not go into that unknown and terrible
land alone. i suppose it is thus that in old times one vampire meant
many; just as their hideous bodies could only rest in sacred earth, so
the holiest love was the recruiting sergeant for their ghastly ranks.

we entered carfax without trouble and found all things the same as on
the first occasion. it was hard to believe that amongst so prosaic
surroundings of neglect and dust and decay there was any ground for such
fear as already we knew. had not our minds been made up, and had there
not been terrible memories to spur us on, we could hardly have proceeded
with our task. we found no papers, or any sign of use in the house; and
in the old chapel the great boxes looked just as we had seen them last.
dr. van helsing said to us solemnly as we stood before them:--

“and now, my friends, we have a duty here to do. we must sterilise this
earth, so sacred of holy memories, that he has brought from a far
distant land for such fell use. he has chosen this earth because it has
been holy. thus we defeat him with his own weapon, for we make it more
holy still. it was sanctified to such use of man, now we sanctify it to
god.” as he spoke he took from his bag a screwdriver and a wrench, and
very soon the top of one of the cases was thrown open. the earth smelled
musty and close; but we did not somehow seem to mind, for our attention
was concentrated on the professor. taking from his box a piece of the
sacred wafer he laid it reverently on the earth, and then shutting down
the lid began to screw it home, we aiding him as he worked.

one by one we treated in the same way each of the great boxes, and left
them as we had found them to all appearance; but in each was a portion
of the host.

when we closed the door behind us, the professor said solemnly:--

“so much is already done. if it may be that with all the others we can
be so successful, then the sunset of this evening may shine on madam
mina’s forehead all white as ivory and with no stain!”

as we passed across the lawn on our way to the station to catch our
train we could see the front of the asylum. i looked eagerly, and in the
window of my own room saw mina. i waved my hand to her, and nodded to
tell that our work there was successfully accomplished. she nodded in
reply to show that she understood. the last i saw, she was waving her
hand in farewell. it was with a heavy heart that we sought the station
and just caught the train, which was steaming in as we reached the
platform.

i have written this in the train.

       *       *       *       *       *

_piccadilly, 12:30 o’clock._--just before we reached fenchurch street
lord godalming said to me:--

“quincey and i will find a locksmith. you had better not come with us in
case there should be any difficulty; for under the circumstances it
wouldn’t seem so bad for us to break into an empty house. but you are a
solicitor and the incorporated law society might tell you that you
should have known better.” i demurred as to my not sharing any danger
even of odium, but he went on: “besides, it will attract less attention
if there are not too many of us. my title will make it all right with
the locksmith, and with any policeman that may come along. you had
better go with jack and the professor and stay in the green park,
somewhere in sight of the house; and when you see the door opened and
the smith has gone away, do you all come across. we shall be on the
lookout for you, and shall let you in.”

“the advice is good!” said van helsing, so we said no more. godalming
and morris hurried off in a cab, we following in another. at the corner
of arlington street our contingent got out and strolled into the green
park. my heart beat as i saw the house on which so much of our hope was
centred, looming up grim and silent in its deserted condition amongst
its more lively and spruce-looking neighbours. we sat down on a bench
within good view, and began to smoke cigars so as to attract as little
attention as possible. the minutes seemed to pass with leaden feet as we
waited for the coming of the others.

at length we saw a four-wheeler drive up. out of it, in leisurely
fashion, got lord godalming and morris; and down from the box descended
a thick-set working man with his rush-woven basket of tools. morris paid
the cabman, who touched his hat and drove away. together the two
ascended the steps, and lord godalming pointed out what he wanted done.
the workman took off his coat leisurely and hung it on one of the spikes
of the rail, saying something to a policeman who just then sauntered
along. the policeman nodded acquiescence, and the man kneeling down
placed his bag beside him. after searching through it, he took out a
selection of tools which he produced to lay beside him in orderly
fashion. then he stood up, looked into the keyhole, blew into it, and
turning to his employers, made some remark. lord godalming smiled, and
the man lifted a good-sized bunch of keys; selecting one of them, he
began to probe the lock, as if feeling his way with it. after fumbling
about for a bit he tried a second, and then a third. all at once the
door opened under a slight push from him, and he and the two others
entered the hall. we sat still; my own cigar burnt furiously, but van
helsing’s went cold altogether. we waited patiently as we saw the
workman come out and bring in his bag. then he held the door partly
open, steadying it with his knees, whilst he fitted a key to the lock.
this he finally handed to lord godalming, who took out his purse and
gave him something. the man touched his hat, took his bag, put on his
coat and departed; not a soul took the slightest notice of the whole
transaction.

when the man had fairly gone, we three crossed the street and knocked at
the door. it was immediately opened by quincey morris, beside whom stood
lord godalming lighting a cigar.

“the place smells so vilely,” said the latter as we came in. it did
indeed smell vilely--like the old chapel at carfax--and with our
previous experience it was plain to us that the count had been using the
place pretty freely. we moved to explore the house, all keeping together
in case of attack; for we knew we had a strong and wily enemy to deal
with, and as yet we did not know whether the count might not be in the
house. in the dining-room, which lay at the back of the hall, we found
eight boxes of earth. eight boxes only out of the nine, which we sought!
our work was not over, and would never be until we should have found the
missing box. first we opened the shutters of the window which looked out
across a narrow stone-flagged yard at the blank face of a stable,
pointed to look like the front of a miniature house. there were no
windows in it, so we were not afraid of being over-looked. we did not
lose any time in examining the chests. with the tools which we had
brought with us we opened them, one by one, and treated them as we had
treated those others in the old chapel. it was evident to us that the
count was not at present in the house, and we proceeded to search for
any of his effects.

after a cursory glance at the rest of the rooms, from basement to attic,
we came to the conclusion that the dining-room contained any effects
which might belong to the count; and so we proceeded to minutely examine
them. they lay in a sort of orderly disorder on the great dining-room
table. there were title deeds of the piccadilly house in a great bundle;
deeds of the purchase of the houses at mile end and bermondsey;
note-paper, envelopes, and pens and ink. all were covered up in thin
wrapping paper to keep them from the dust. there were also a clothes
brush, a brush and comb, and a jug and basin--the latter containing
dirty water which was reddened as if with blood. last of all was a
little heap of keys of all sorts and sizes, probably those belonging to
the other houses. when we had examined this last find, lord godalming
and quincey morris taking accurate notes of the various addresses of the
houses in the east and the south, took with them the keys in a great
bunch, and set out to destroy the boxes in these places. the rest of us
are, with what patience we can, waiting their return--or the coming of
the count.




chapter xxiii

dr. seward’s diary


_3 october._--the time seemed terribly long whilst we were waiting for
the coming of godalming and quincey morris. the professor tried to keep
our minds active by using them all the time. i could see his beneficent
purpose, by the side glances which he threw from time to time at harker.
the poor fellow is overwhelmed in a misery that is appalling to see.
last night he was a frank, happy-looking man, with strong, youthful
face, full of energy, and with dark brown hair. to-day he is a drawn,
haggard old man, whose white hair matches well with the hollow burning
eyes and grief-written lines of his face. his energy is still intact; in
fact, he is like a living flame. this may yet be his salvation, for, if
all go well, it will tide him over the despairing period; he will then,
in a kind of way, wake again to the realities of life. poor fellow, i
thought my own trouble was bad enough, but his----! the professor knows
this well enough, and is doing his best to keep his mind active. what he
has been saying was, under the circumstances, of absorbing interest. so
well as i can remember, here it is:--

“i have studied, over and over again since they came into my hands, all
the papers relating to this monster; and the more i have studied, the
greater seems the necessity to utterly stamp him out. all through there
are signs of his advance; not only of his power, but of his knowledge of
it. as i learned from the researches of my friend arminus of buda-pesth,
he was in life a most wonderful man. soldier, statesman, and
alchemist--which latter was the highest development of the
science-knowledge of his time. he had a mighty brain, a learning beyond
compare, and a heart that knew no fear and no remorse. he dared even to
attend the scholomance, and there was no branch of knowledge of his time
that he did not essay. well, in him the brain powers survived the
physical death; though it would seem that memory was not all complete.
in some faculties of mind he has been, and is, only a child; but he is
growing, and some things that were childish at the first are now of
man’s stature. he is experimenting, and doing it well; and if it had not
been that we have crossed his path he would be yet--he may be yet if we
fail--the father or furtherer of a new order of beings, whose road must
lead through death, not life.”

harker groaned and said, “and this is all arrayed against my darling!
but how is he experimenting? the knowledge may help us to defeat him!”

“he has all along, since his coming, been trying his power, slowly but
surely; that big child-brain of his is working. well for us, it is, as
yet, a child-brain; for had he dared, at the first, to attempt certain
things he would long ago have been beyond our power. however, he means
to succeed, and a man who has centuries before him can afford to wait
and to go slow. _festina lente_ may well be his motto.”

“i fail to understand,” said harker wearily. “oh, do be more plain to
me! perhaps grief and trouble are dulling my brain.”

the professor laid his hand tenderly on his shoulder as he spoke:--

“ah, my child, i will be plain. do you not see how, of late, this
monster has been creeping into knowledge experimentally. how he has been
making use of the zoöphagous patient to effect his entry into friend
john’s home; for your vampire, though in all afterwards he can come when
and how he will, must at the first make entry only when asked thereto by
an inmate. but these are not his most important experiments. do we not
see how at the first all these so great boxes were moved by others. he
knew not then but that must be so. but all the time that so great
child-brain of his was growing, and he began to consider whether he
might not himself move the box. so he began to help; and then, when he
found that this be all-right, he try to move them all alone. and so he
progress, and he scatter these graves of him; and none but he know where
they are hidden. he may have intend to bury them deep in the ground. so
that he only use them in the night, or at such time as he can change his
form, they do him equal well; and none may know these are his
hiding-place! but, my child, do not despair; this knowledge come to him
just too late! already all of his lairs but one be sterilise as for him;
and before the sunset this shall be so. then he have no place where he
can move and hide. i delayed this morning that so we might be sure. is
there not more at stake for us than for him? then why we not be even
more careful than him? by my clock it is one hour and already, if all be
well, friend arthur and quincey are on their way to us. to-day is our
day, and we must go sure, if slow, and lose no chance. see! there are
five of us when those absent ones return.”

whilst he was speaking we were startled by a knock at the hall door, the
double postman’s knock of the telegraph boy. we all moved out to the
hall with one impulse, and van helsing, holding up his hand to us to
keep silence, stepped to the door and opened it. the boy handed in a
despatch. the professor closed the door again, and, after looking at the
direction, opened it and read aloud.

“look out for d. he has just now, 12:45, come from carfax hurriedly and
hastened towards the south. he seems to be going the round and may want
to see you: mina.”

there was a pause, broken by jonathan harker’s voice:--

“now, god be thanked, we shall soon meet!” van helsing turned to him
quickly and said:--

“god will act in his own way and time. do not fear, and do not rejoice
as yet; for what we wish for at the moment may be our undoings.”

“i care for nothing now,” he answered hotly, “except to wipe out this
brute from the face of creation. i would sell my soul to do it!”

“oh, hush, hush, my child!” said van helsing. “god does not purchase
souls in this wise; and the devil, though he may purchase, does not keep
faith. but god is merciful and just, and knows your pain and your
devotion to that dear madam mina. think you, how her pain would be
doubled, did she but hear your wild words. do not fear any of us, we are
all devoted to this cause, and to-day shall see the end. the time is
coming for action; to-day this vampire is limit to the powers of man,
and till sunset he may not change. it will take him time to arrive
here--see, it is twenty minutes past one--and there are yet some times
before he can hither come, be he never so quick. what we must hope for
is that my lord arthur and quincey arrive first.”

about half an hour after we had received mrs. harker’s telegram, there
came a quiet, resolute knock at the hall door. it was just an ordinary
knock, such as is given hourly by thousands of gentlemen, but it made
the professor’s heart and mine beat loudly. we looked at each other, and
together moved out into the hall; we each held ready to use our various
armaments--the spiritual in the left hand, the mortal in the right. van
helsing pulled back the latch, and, holding the door half open, stood
back, having both hands ready for action. the gladness of our hearts
must have shown upon our faces when on the step, close to the door, we
saw lord godalming and quincey morris. they came quickly in and closed
the door behind them, the former saying, as they moved along the
hall:--

“it is all right. we found both places; six boxes in each and we
destroyed them all!”

“destroyed?” asked the professor.

“for him!” we were silent for a minute, and then quincey said:--

“there’s nothing to do but to wait here. if, however, he doesn’t turn up
by five o’clock, we must start off; for it won’t do to leave mrs. harker
alone after sunset.”

“he will be here before long now,” said van helsing, who had been
consulting his pocket-book. “_nota bene_, in madam’s telegram he went
south from carfax, that means he went to cross the river, and he could
only do so at slack of tide, which should be something before one
o’clock. that he went south has a meaning for us. he is as yet only
suspicious; and he went from carfax first to the place where he would
suspect interference least. you must have been at bermondsey only a
short time before him. that he is not here already shows that he went to
mile end next. this took him some time; for he would then have to be
carried over the river in some way. believe me, my friends, we shall not
have long to wait now. we should have ready some plan of attack, so that
we may throw away no chance. hush, there is no time now. have all your
arms! be ready!” he held up a warning hand as he spoke, for we all could
hear a key softly inserted in the lock of the hall door.

i could not but admire, even at such a moment, the way in which a
dominant spirit asserted itself. in all our hunting parties and
adventures in different parts of the world, quincey morris had always
been the one to arrange the plan of action, and arthur and i had been
accustomed to obey him implicitly. now, the old habit seemed to be
renewed instinctively. with a swift glance around the room, he at once
laid out our plan of attack, and, without speaking a word, with a
gesture, placed us each in position. van helsing, harker, and i were
just behind the door, so that when it was opened the professor could
guard it whilst we two stepped between the incomer and the door.
godalming behind and quincey in front stood just out of sight ready to
move in front of the window. we waited in a suspense that made the
seconds pass with nightmare slowness. the slow, careful steps came along
the hall; the count was evidently prepared for some surprise--at least
he feared it.

suddenly with a single bound he leaped into the room, winning a way past
us before any of us could raise a hand to stay him. there was something
so panther-like in the movement--something so unhuman, that it seemed
to sober us all from the shock of his coming. the first to act was
harker, who, with a quick movement, threw himself before the door
leading into the room in the front of the house. as the count saw us, a
horrible sort of snarl passed over his face, showing the eye-teeth long
and pointed; but the evil smile as quickly passed into a cold stare of
lion-like disdain. his expression again changed as, with a single
impulse, we all advanced upon him. it was a pity that we had not some
better organised plan of attack, for even at the moment i wondered what
we were to do. i did not myself know whether our lethal weapons would
avail us anything. harker evidently meant to try the matter, for he had
ready his great kukri knife and made a fierce and sudden cut at him. the
blow was a powerful one; only the diabolical quickness of the count’s
leap back saved him. a second less and the trenchant blade had shorne
through his heart. as it was, the point just cut the cloth of his coat,
making a wide gap whence a bundle of bank-notes and a stream of gold
fell out. the expression of the count’s face was so hellish, that for a
moment i feared for harker, though i saw him throw the terrible knife
aloft again for another stroke. instinctively i moved forward with a
protective impulse, holding the crucifix and wafer in my left hand. i
felt a mighty power fly along my arm; and it was without surprise that i
saw the monster cower back before a similar movement made spontaneously
by each one of us. it would be impossible to describe the expression of
hate and baffled malignity--of anger and hellish rage--which came over
the count’s face. his waxen hue became greenish-yellow by the contrast
of his burning eyes, and the red scar on the forehead showed on the
pallid skin like a palpitating wound. the next instant, with a sinuous
dive he swept under harker’s arm, ere his blow could fall, and, grasping
a handful of the money from the floor, dashed across the room, threw
himself at the window. amid the crash and glitter of the falling glass,
he tumbled into the flagged area below. through the sound of the
shivering glass i could hear the “ting” of the gold, as some of the
sovereigns fell on the flagging.

we ran over and saw him spring unhurt from the ground. he, rushing up
the steps, crossed the flagged yard, and pushed open the stable door.
there he turned and spoke to us:--

“you think to baffle me, you--with your pale faces all in a row, like
sheep in a butcher’s. you shall be sorry yet, each one of you! you think
you have left me without a place to rest; but i have more. my revenge is
just begun! i spread it over centuries, and time is on my side. your
girls that you all love are mine already; and through them you and
others shall yet be mine--my creatures, to do my bidding and to be my
jackals when i want to feed. bah!” with a contemptuous sneer, he passed
quickly through the door, and we heard the rusty bolt creak as he
fastened it behind him. a door beyond opened and shut. the first of us
to speak was the professor, as, realising the difficulty of following
him through the stable, we moved toward the hall.

“we have learnt something--much! notwithstanding his brave words, he
fears us; he fear time, he fear want! for if not, why he hurry so? his
very tone betray him, or my ears deceive. why take that money? you
follow quick. you are hunters of wild beast, and understand it so. for
me, i make sure that nothing here may be of use to him, if so that he
return.” as he spoke he put the money remaining into his pocket; took
the title-deeds in the bundle as harker had left them, and swept the
remaining things into the open fireplace, where he set fire to them with
a match.

godalming and morris had rushed out into the yard, and harker had
lowered himself from the window to follow the count. he had, however,
bolted the stable door; and by the time they had forced it open there
was no sign of him. van helsing and i tried to make inquiry at the back
of the house; but the mews was deserted and no one had seen him depart.

it was now late in the afternoon, and sunset was not far off. we had to
recognise that our game was up; with heavy hearts we agreed with the
professor when he said:--

“let us go back to madam mina--poor, poor dear madam mina. all we can do
just now is done; and we can there, at least, protect her. but we need
not despair. there is but one more earth-box, and we must try to find
it; when that is done all may yet be well.” i could see that he spoke as
bravely as he could to comfort harker. the poor fellow was quite broken
down; now and again he gave a low groan which he could not suppress--he
was thinking of his wife.

with sad hearts we came back to my house, where we found mrs. harker
waiting us, with an appearance of cheerfulness which did honour to her
bravery and unselfishness. when she saw our faces, her own became as
pale as death: for a second or two her eyes were closed as if she were
in secret prayer; and then she said cheerfully:--

“i can never thank you all enough. oh, my poor darling!” as she spoke,
she took her husband’s grey head in her hands and kissed it--“lay your
poor head here and rest it. all will yet be well, dear! god will protect
us if he so will it in his good intent.” the poor fellow groaned. there
was no place for words in his sublime misery.

we had a sort of perfunctory supper together, and i think it cheered us
all up somewhat. it was, perhaps, the mere animal heat of food to hungry
people--for none of us had eaten anything since breakfast--or the sense
of companionship may have helped us; but anyhow we were all less
miserable, and saw the morrow as not altogether without hope. true to
our promise, we told mrs. harker everything which had passed; and
although she grew snowy white at times when danger had seemed to
threaten her husband, and red at others when his devotion to her was
manifested, she listened bravely and with calmness. when we came to the
part where harker had rushed at the count so recklessly, she clung to
her husband’s arm, and held it tight as though her clinging could
protect him from any harm that might come. she said nothing, however,
till the narration was all done, and matters had been brought right up
to the present time. then without letting go her husband’s hand she
stood up amongst us and spoke. oh, that i could give any idea of the
scene; of that sweet, sweet, good, good woman in all the radiant beauty
of her youth and animation, with the red scar on her forehead, of which
she was conscious, and which we saw with grinding of our
teeth--remembering whence and how it came; her loving kindness against
our grim hate; her tender faith against all our fears and doubting; and
we, knowing that so far as symbols went, she with all her goodness and
purity and faith, was outcast from god.

“jonathan,” she said, and the word sounded like music on her lips it was
so full of love and tenderness, “jonathan dear, and you all my true,
true friends, i want you to bear something in mind through all this
dreadful time. i know that you must fight--that you must destroy even as
you destroyed the false lucy so that the true lucy might live hereafter;
but it is not a work of hate. that poor soul who has wrought all this
misery is the saddest case of all. just think what will be his joy when
he, too, is destroyed in his worser part that his better part may have
spiritual immortality. you must be pitiful to him, too, though it may
not hold your hands from his destruction.”

as she spoke i could see her husband’s face darken and draw together, as
though the passion in him were shrivelling his being to its core.
instinctively the clasp on his wife’s hand grew closer, till his
knuckles looked white. she did not flinch from the pain which i knew she
must have suffered, but looked at him with eyes that were more appealing
than ever. as she stopped speaking he leaped to his feet, almost tearing
his hand from hers as he spoke:--

“may god give him into my hand just for long enough to destroy that
earthly life of him which we are aiming at. if beyond it i could send
his soul for ever and ever to burning hell i would do it!”

“oh, hush! oh, hush! in the name of the good god. don’t say such things,
jonathan, my husband; or you will crush me with fear and horror. just
think, my dear--i have been thinking all this long, long day of it--that
... perhaps ... some day ... i, too, may need such pity; and that some
other like you--and with equal cause for anger--may deny it to me! oh,
my husband! my husband, indeed i would have spared you such a thought
had there been another way; but i pray that god may not have treasured
your wild words, except as the heart-broken wail of a very loving and
sorely stricken man. oh, god, let these poor white hairs go in evidence
of what he has suffered, who all his life has done no wrong, and on whom
so many sorrows have come.”

we men were all in tears now. there was no resisting them, and we wept
openly. she wept, too, to see that her sweeter counsels had prevailed.
her husband flung himself on his knees beside her, and putting his arms
round her, hid his face in the folds of her dress. van helsing beckoned
to us and we stole out of the room, leaving the two loving hearts alone
with their god.

before they retired the professor fixed up the room against any coming
of the vampire, and assured mrs. harker that she might rest in peace.
she tried to school herself to the belief, and, manifestly for her
husband’s sake, tried to seem content. it was a brave struggle; and was,
i think and believe, not without its reward. van helsing had placed at
hand a bell which either of them was to sound in case of any emergency.
when they had retired, quincey, godalming, and i arranged that we should
sit up, dividing the night between us, and watch over the safety of the
poor stricken lady. the first watch falls to quincey, so the rest of us
shall be off to bed as soon as we can. godalming has already turned in,
for his is the second watch. now that my work is done i, too, shall go
to bed.


_jonathan harker’s journal._

_3-4 october, close to midnight._--i thought yesterday would never end.
there was over me a yearning for sleep, in some sort of blind belief
that to wake would be to find things changed, and that any change must
now be for the better. before we parted, we discussed what our next step
was to be, but we could arrive at no result. all we knew was that one
earth-box remained, and that the count alone knew where it was. if he
chooses to lie hidden, he may baffle us for years; and in the
meantime!--the thought is too horrible, i dare not think of it even now.
this i know: that if ever there was a woman who was all perfection, that
one is my poor wronged darling. i love her a thousand times more for her
sweet pity of last night, a pity that made my own hate of the monster
seem despicable. surely god will not permit the world to be the poorer
by the loss of such a creature. this is hope to me. we are all drifting
reefwards now, and faith is our only anchor. thank god! mina is
sleeping, and sleeping without dreams. i fear what her dreams might be
like, with such terrible memories to ground them in. she has not been so
calm, within my seeing, since the sunset. then, for a while, there came
over her face a repose which was like spring after the blasts of march.
i thought at the time that it was the softness of the red sunset on her
face, but somehow now i think it has a deeper meaning. i am not sleepy
myself, though i am weary--weary to death. however, i must try to sleep;
for there is to-morrow to think of, and there is no rest for me
until....

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--i must have fallen asleep, for i was awaked by mina, who was
sitting up in bed, with a startled look on her face. i could see easily,
for we did not leave the room in darkness; she had placed a warning hand
over my mouth, and now she whispered in my ear:--

“hush! there is someone in the corridor!” i got up softly, and crossing
the room, gently opened the door.

just outside, stretched on a mattress, lay mr. morris, wide awake. he
raised a warning hand for silence as he whispered to me:--

“hush! go back to bed; it is all right. one of us will be here all
night. we don’t mean to take any chances!”

his look and gesture forbade discussion, so i came back and told mina.
she sighed and positively a shadow of a smile stole over her poor, pale
face as she put her arms round me and said softly:--

“oh, thank god for good brave men!” with a sigh she sank back again to
sleep. i write this now as i am not sleepy, though i must try again.

       *       *       *       *       *

_4 october, morning._--once again during the night i was wakened by
mina. this time we had all had a good sleep, for the grey of the coming
dawn was making the windows into sharp oblongs, and the gas flame was
like a speck rather than a disc of light. she said to me hurriedly:--

“go, call the professor. i want to see him at once.”

“why?” i asked.

“i have an idea. i suppose it must have come in the night, and matured
without my knowing it. he must hypnotise me before the dawn, and then i
shall be able to speak. go quick, dearest; the time is getting close.” i
went to the door. dr. seward was resting on the mattress, and, seeing
me, he sprang to his feet.

“is anything wrong?” he asked, in alarm.

“no,” i replied; “but mina wants to see dr. van helsing at once.”

“i will go,” he said, and hurried into the professor’s room.

in two or three minutes later van helsing was in the room in his
dressing-gown, and mr. morris and lord godalming were with dr. seward at
the door asking questions. when the professor saw mina smile--a
positive smile ousted the anxiety of his face; he rubbed his hands as he
said:--

“oh, my dear madam mina, this is indeed a change. see! friend jonathan,
we have got our dear madam mina, as of old, back to us to-day!” then
turning to her, he said, cheerfully: “and what am i do for you? for at
this hour you do not want me for nothings.”

“i want you to hypnotise me!” she said. “do it before the dawn, for i
feel that then i can speak, and speak freely. be quick, for the time is
short!” without a word he motioned her to sit up in bed.

looking fixedly at her, he commenced to make passes in front of her,
from over the top of her head downward, with each hand in turn. mina
gazed at him fixedly for a few minutes, during which my own heart beat
like a trip hammer, for i felt that some crisis was at hand. gradually
her eyes closed, and she sat, stock still; only by the gentle heaving of
her bosom could one know that she was alive. the professor made a few
more passes and then stopped, and i could see that his forehead was
covered with great beads of perspiration. mina opened her eyes; but she
did not seem the same woman. there was a far-away look in her eyes, and
her voice had a sad dreaminess which was new to me. raising his hand to
impose silence, the professor motioned to me to bring the others in.
they came on tip-toe, closing the door behind them, and stood at the
foot of the bed, looking on. mina appeared not to see them. the
stillness was broken by van helsing’s voice speaking in a low level tone
which would not break the current of her thoughts:--

“where are you?” the answer came in a neutral way:--

“i do not know. sleep has no place it can call its own.” for several
minutes there was silence. mina sat rigid, and the professor stood
staring at her fixedly; the rest of us hardly dared to breathe. the room
was growing lighter; without taking his eyes from mina’s face, dr. van
helsing motioned me to pull up the blind. i did so, and the day seemed
just upon us. a red streak shot up, and a rosy light seemed to diffuse
itself through the room. on the instant the professor spoke again:--

“where are you now?” the answer came dreamily, but with intention; it
were as though she were interpreting something. i have heard her use the
same tone when reading her shorthand notes.

“i do not know. it is all strange to me!”

“what do you see?”

“i can see nothing; it is all dark.”

“what do you hear?” i could detect the strain in the professor’s patient
voice.

“the lapping of water. it is gurgling by, and little waves leap. i can
hear them on the outside.”

“then you are on a ship?” we all looked at each other, trying to glean
something each from the other. we were afraid to think. the answer came
quick:--

“oh, yes!”

“what else do you hear?”

“the sound of men stamping overhead as they run about. there is the
creaking of a chain, and the loud tinkle as the check of the capstan
falls into the rachet.”

“what are you doing?”

“i am still--oh, so still. it is like death!” the voice faded away into
a deep breath as of one sleeping, and the open eyes closed again.

by this time the sun had risen, and we were all in the full light of
day. dr. van helsing placed his hands on mina’s shoulders, and laid her
head down softly on her pillow. she lay like a sleeping child for a few
moments, and then, with a long sigh, awoke and stared in wonder to see
us all around her. “have i been talking in my sleep?” was all she said.
she seemed, however, to know the situation without telling, though she
was eager to know what she had told. the professor repeated the
conversation, and she said:--

“then there is not a moment to lose: it may not be yet too late!” mr.
morris and lord godalming started for the door but the professor’s calm
voice called them back:--

“stay, my friends. that ship, wherever it was, was weighing anchor
whilst she spoke. there are many ships weighing anchor at the moment in
your so great port of london. which of them is it that you seek? god be
thanked that we have once again a clue, though whither it may lead us we
know not. we have been blind somewhat; blind after the manner of men,
since when we can look back we see what we might have seen looking
forward if we had been able to see what we might have seen! alas, but
that sentence is a puddle; is it not? we can know now what was in the
count’s mind, when he seize that money, though jonathan’s so fierce
knife put him in the danger that even he dread. he meant escape. hear
me, escape! he saw that with but one earth-box left, and a pack of men
following like dogs after a fox, this london was no place for him. he
have take his last earth-box on board a ship, and he leave the land. he
think to escape, but no! we follow him. tally ho! as friend arthur would
say when he put on his red frock! our old fox is wily; oh! so wily, and
we must follow with wile. i, too, am wily and i think his mind in a
little while. in meantime we may rest and in peace, for there are waters
between us which he do not want to pass, and which he could not if he
would--unless the ship were to touch the land, and then only at full or
slack tide. see, and the sun is just rose, and all day to sunset is to
us. let us take bath, and dress, and have breakfast which we all need,
and which we can eat comfortably since he be not in the same land with
us.” mina looked at him appealingly as she asked:--

“but why need we seek him further, when he is gone away from us?” he
took her hand and patted it as he replied:--

“ask me nothings as yet. when we have breakfast, then i answer all
questions.” he would say no more, and we separated to dress.

after breakfast mina repeated her question. he looked at her gravely for
a minute and then said sorrowfully:--

“because my dear, dear madam mina, now more than ever must we find him
even if we have to follow him to the jaws of hell!” she grew paler as
she asked faintly:--

“why?”

“because,” he answered solemnly, “he can live for centuries, and you are
but mortal woman. time is now to be dreaded--since once he put that mark
upon your throat.”

i was just in time to catch her as she fell forward in a faint.




chapter xxiv

dr. seward’s phonograph diary, spoken by van helsing


this to jonathan harker.

you are to stay with your dear madam mina. we shall go to make our
search--if i can call it so, for it is not search but knowing, and we
seek confirmation only. but do you stay and take care of her to-day.
this is your best and most holiest office. this day nothing can find him
here. let me tell you that so you will know what we four know already,
for i have tell them. he, our enemy, have gone away; he have gone back
to his castle in transylvania. i know it so well, as if a great hand of
fire wrote it on the wall. he have prepare for this in some way, and
that last earth-box was ready to ship somewheres. for this he took the
money; for this he hurry at the last, lest we catch him before the sun
go down. it was his last hope, save that he might hide in the tomb that
he think poor miss lucy, being as he thought like him, keep open to him.
but there was not of time. when that fail he make straight for his last
resource--his last earth-work i might say did i wish _double entente_.
he is clever, oh, so clever! he know that his game here was finish; and
so he decide he go back home. he find ship going by the route he came,
and he go in it. we go off now to find what ship, and whither bound;
when we have discover that, we come back and tell you all. then we will
comfort you and poor dear madam mina with new hope. for it will be hope
when you think it over: that all is not lost. this very creature that we
pursue, he take hundreds of years to get so far as london; and yet in
one day, when we know of the disposal of him we drive him out. he is
finite, though he is powerful to do much harm and suffers not as we do.
but we are strong, each in our purpose; and we are all more strong
together. take heart afresh, dear husband of madam mina. this battle is
but begun, and in the end we shall win--so sure as that god sits on high
to watch over his children. therefore be of much comfort till we return.

van helsing.


_jonathan harker’s journal._

_4 october._--when i read to mina, van helsing’s message in the
phonograph, the poor girl brightened up considerably. already the
certainty that the count is out of the country has given her comfort;
and comfort is strength to her. for my own part, now that his horrible
danger is not face to face with us, it seems almost impossible to
believe in it. even my own terrible experiences in castle dracula seem
like a long-forgotten dream. here in the crisp autumn air in the bright
sunlight----

alas! how can i disbelieve! in the midst of my thought my eye fell on
the red scar on my poor darling’s white forehead. whilst that lasts,
there can be no disbelief. and afterwards the very memory of it will
keep faith crystal clear. mina and i fear to be idle, so we have been
over all the diaries again and again. somehow, although the reality
seems greater each time, the pain and the fear seem less. there is
something of a guiding purpose manifest throughout, which is comforting.
mina says that perhaps we are the instruments of ultimate good. it may
be! i shall try to think as she does. we have never spoken to each other
yet of the future. it is better to wait till we see the professor and
the others after their investigations.

the day is running by more quickly than i ever thought a day could run
for me again. it is now three o’clock.


_mina harker’s journal._

_5 october, 5 p. m._--our meeting for report. present: professor van
helsing, lord godalming, dr. seward, mr. quincey morris, jonathan
harker, mina harker.

dr. van helsing described what steps were taken during the day to
discover on what boat and whither bound count dracula made his escape:--

“as i knew that he wanted to get back to transylvania, i felt sure that
he must go by the danube mouth; or by somewhere in the black sea, since
by that way he come. it was a dreary blank that was before us. _omne
ignotum pro magnifico_; and so with heavy hearts we start to find what
ships leave for the black sea last night. he was in sailing ship, since
madam mina tell of sails being set. these not so important as to go in
your list of the shipping in the _times_, and so we go, by suggestion of
lord godalming, to your lloyd’s, where are note of all ships that sail,
however so small. there we find that only one black-sea-bound ship go
out with the tide. she is the _czarina catherine_, and she sail from
doolittle’s wharf for varna, and thence on to other parts and up the
danube. ‘soh!’ said i, ‘this is the ship whereon is the count.’ so off
we go to doolittle’s wharf, and there we find a man in an office of wood
so small that the man look bigger than the office. from him we inquire
of the goings of the _czarina catherine_. he swear much, and he red face
and loud of voice, but he good fellow all the same; and when quincey
give him something from his pocket which crackle as he roll it up, and
put it in a so small bag which he have hid deep in his clothing, he
still better fellow and humble servant to us. he come with us, and ask
many men who are rough and hot; these be better fellows too when they
have been no more thirsty. they say much of blood and bloom, and of
others which i comprehend not, though i guess what they mean; but
nevertheless they tell us all things which we want to know.

“they make known to us among them, how last afternoon at about five
o’clock comes a man so hurry. a tall man, thin and pale, with high nose
and teeth so white, and eyes that seem to be burning. that he be all in
black, except that he have a hat of straw which suit not him or the
time. that he scatter his money in making quick inquiry as to what ship
sails for the black sea and for where. some took him to the office and
then to the ship, where he will not go aboard but halt at shore end of
gang-plank, and ask that the captain come to him. the captain come, when
told that he will be pay well; and though he swear much at the first he
agree to term. then the thin man go and some one tell him where horse
and cart can be hired. he go there and soon he come again, himself
driving cart on which a great box; this he himself lift down, though it
take several to put it on truck for the ship. he give much talk to
captain as to how and where his box is to be place; but the captain like
it not and swear at him in many tongues, and tell him that if he like he
can come and see where it shall be. but he say ‘no’; that he come not
yet, for that he have much to do. whereupon the captain tell him that he
had better be quick--with blood--for that his ship will leave the
place--of blood--before the turn of the tide--with blood. then the thin
man smile and say that of course he must go when he think fit; but he
will be surprise if he go quite so soon. the captain swear again,
polyglot, and the thin man make him bow, and thank him, and say that he
will so far intrude on his kindness as to come aboard before the
sailing. final the captain, more red than ever, and in more tongues tell
him that he doesn’t want no frenchmen--with bloom upon them and also
with blood--in his ship--with blood on her also. and so, after asking
where there might be close at hand a ship where he might purchase ship
forms, he departed.

“no one knew where he went ‘or bloomin’ well cared,’ as they said, for
they had something else to think of--well with blood again; for it soon
became apparent to all that the _czarina catherine_ would not sail as
was expected. a thin mist began to creep up from the river, and it grew,
and grew; till soon a dense fog enveloped the ship and all around her.
the captain swore polyglot--very polyglot--polyglot with bloom and
blood; but he could do nothing. the water rose and rose; and he began to
fear that he would lose the tide altogether. he was in no friendly mood,
when just at full tide, the thin man came up the gang-plank again and
asked to see where his box had been stowed. then the captain replied
that he wished that he and his box--old and with much bloom and
blood--were in hell. but the thin man did not be offend, and went down
with the mate and saw where it was place, and came up and stood awhile
on deck in fog. he must have come off by himself, for none notice him.
indeed they thought not of him; for soon the fog begin to melt away, and
all was clear again. my friends of the thirst and the language that was
of bloom and blood laughed, as they told how the captain’s swears
exceeded even his usual polyglot, and was more than ever full of
picturesque, when on questioning other mariners who were on movement up
and down on the river that hour, he found that few of them had seen any
of fog at all, except where it lay round the wharf. however, the ship
went out on the ebb tide; and was doubtless by morning far down the
river mouth. she was by then, when they told us, well out to sea.

“and so, my dear madam mina, it is that we have to rest for a time, for
our enemy is on the sea, with the fog at his command, on his way to the
danube mouth. to sail a ship takes time, go she never so quick; and when
we start we go on land more quick, and we meet him there. our best hope
is to come on him when in the box between sunrise and sunset; for then
he can make no struggle, and we may deal with him as we should. there
are days for us, in which we can make ready our plan. we know all about
where he go; for we have seen the owner of the ship, who have shown us
invoices and all papers that can be. the box we seek is to be landed in
varna, and to be given to an agent, one ristics who will there present
his credentials; and so our merchant friend will have done his part.
when he ask if there be any wrong, for that so, he can telegraph and
have inquiry made at varna, we say ‘no’; for what is to be done is not
for police or of the customs. it must be done by us alone and in our own
way.”

when dr. van helsing had done speaking, i asked him if he were certain
that the count had remained on board the ship. he replied: “we have the
best proof of that: your own evidence, when in the hypnotic trance this
morning.” i asked him again if it were really necessary that they should
pursue the count, for oh! i dread jonathan leaving me, and i know that
he would surely go if the others went. he answered in growing passion,
at first quietly. as he went on, however, he grew more angry and more
forceful, till in the end we could not but see wherein was at least some
of that personal dominance which made him so long a master amongst
men:--

“yes, it is necessary--necessary--necessary! for your sake in the first,
and then for the sake of humanity. this monster has done much harm
already, in the narrow scope where he find himself, and in the short
time when as yet he was only as a body groping his so small measure in
darkness and not knowing. all this have i told these others; you, my
dear madam mina, will learn it in the phonograph of my friend john, or
in that of your husband. i have told them how the measure of leaving his
own barren land--barren of peoples--and coming to a new land where life
of man teems till they are like the multitude of standing corn, was the
work of centuries. were another of the un-dead, like him, to try to do
what he has done, perhaps not all the centuries of the world that have
been, or that will be, could aid him. with this one, all the forces of
nature that are occult and deep and strong must have worked together in
some wondrous way. the very place, where he have been alive, un-dead for
all these centuries, is full of strangeness of the geologic and chemical
world. there are deep caverns and fissures that reach none know whither.
there have been volcanoes, some of whose openings still send out waters
of strange properties, and gases that kill or make to vivify. doubtless,
there is something magnetic or electric in some of these combinations of
occult forces which work for physical life in strange way; and in
himself were from the first some great qualities. in a hard and warlike
time he was celebrate that he have more iron nerve, more subtle brain,
more braver heart, than any man. in him some vital principle have in
strange way found their utmost; and as his body keep strong and grow and
thrive, so his brain grow too. all this without that diabolic aid which
is surely to him; for it have to yield to the powers that come from,
and are, symbolic of good. and now this is what he is to us. he have
infect you--oh, forgive me, my dear, that i must say such; but it is for
good of you that i speak. he infect you in such wise, that even if he do
no more, you have only to live--to live in your own old, sweet way; and
so in time, death, which is of man’s common lot and with god’s sanction,
shall make you like to him. this must not be! we have sworn together
that it must not. thus are we ministers of god’s own wish: that the
world, and men for whom his son die, will not be given over to monsters,
whose very existence would defame him. he have allowed us to redeem one
soul already, and we go out as the old knights of the cross to redeem
more. like them we shall travel towards the sunrise; and like them, if
we fall, we fall in good cause.” he paused and i said:--

“but will not the count take his rebuff wisely? since he has been driven
from england, will he not avoid it, as a tiger does the village from
which he has been hunted?”

“aha!” he said, “your simile of the tiger good, for me, and i shall
adopt him. your man-eater, as they of india call the tiger who has once
tasted blood of the human, care no more for the other prey, but prowl
unceasing till he get him. this that we hunt from our village is a
tiger, too, a man-eater, and he never cease to prowl. nay, in himself he
is not one to retire and stay afar. in his life, his living life, he go
over the turkey frontier and attack his enemy on his own ground; he be
beaten back, but did he stay? no! he come again, and again, and again.
look at his persistence and endurance. with the child-brain that was to
him he have long since conceive the idea of coming to a great city. what
does he do? he find out the place of all the world most of promise for
him. then he deliberately set himself down to prepare for the task. he
find in patience just how is his strength, and what are his powers. he
study new tongues. he learn new social life; new environment of old
ways, the politic, the law, the finance, the science, the habit of a new
land and a new people who have come to be since he was. his glimpse that
he have had, whet his appetite only and enkeen his desire. nay, it help
him to grow as to his brain; for it all prove to him how right he was at
the first in his surmises. he have done this alone; all alone! from a
ruin tomb in a forgotten land. what more may he not do when the greater
world of thought is open to him. he that can smile at death, as we know
him; who can flourish in the midst of diseases that kill off whole
peoples. oh, if such an one was to come from god, and not the devil,
what a force for good might he not be in this old world of ours. but we
are pledged to set the world free. our toil must be in silence, and our
efforts all in secret; for in this enlightened age, when men believe not
even what they see, the doubting of wise men would be his greatest
strength. it would be at once his sheath and his armour, and his weapons
to destroy us, his enemies, who are willing to peril even our own souls
for the safety of one we love--for the good of mankind, and for the
honour and glory of god.”

after a general discussion it was determined that for to-night nothing
be definitely settled; that we should all sleep on the facts, and try to
think out the proper conclusions. to-morrow, at breakfast, we are to
meet again, and, after making our conclusions known to one another, we
shall decide on some definite cause of action.

       *       *       *       *       *

i feel a wonderful peace and rest to-night. it is as if some haunting
presence were removed from me. perhaps ...

my surmise was not finished, could not be; for i caught sight in the
mirror of the red mark upon my forehead; and i knew that i was still
unclean.


_dr. seward’s diary._

_5 october._--we all rose early, and i think that sleep did much for
each and all of us. when we met at early breakfast there was more
general cheerfulness than any of us had ever expected to experience
again.

it is really wonderful how much resilience there is in human nature. let
any obstructing cause, no matter what, be removed in any way--even by
death--and we fly back to first principles of hope and enjoyment. more
than once as we sat around the table, my eyes opened in wonder whether
the whole of the past days had not been a dream. it was only when i
caught sight of the red blotch on mrs. harker’s forehead that i was
brought back to reality. even now, when i am gravely revolving the
matter, it is almost impossible to realise that the cause of all our
trouble is still existent. even mrs. harker seems to lose sight of her
trouble for whole spells; it is only now and again, when something
recalls it to her mind, that she thinks of her terrible scar. we are to
meet here in my study in half an hour and decide on our course of
action. i see only one immediate difficulty, i know it by instinct
rather than reason: we shall all have to speak frankly; and yet i fear
that in some mysterious way poor mrs. harker’s tongue is tied. i _know_
that she forms conclusions of her own, and from all that has been i can
guess how brilliant and how true they must be; but she will not, or
cannot, give them utterance. i have mentioned this to van helsing, and
he and i are to talk it over when we are alone. i suppose it is some of
that horrid poison which has got into her veins beginning to work. the
count had his own purposes when he gave her what van helsing called “the
vampire’s baptism of blood.” well, there may be a poison that distils
itself out of good things; in an age when the existence of ptomaines is
a mystery we should not wonder at anything! one thing i know: that if my
instinct be true regarding poor mrs. harker’s silences, then there is a
terrible difficulty--an unknown danger--in the work before us. the same
power that compels her silence may compel her speech. i dare not think
further; for so i should in my thoughts dishonour a noble woman!

van helsing is coming to my study a little before the others. i shall
try to open the subject with him.

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--when the professor came in, we talked over the state of
things. i could see that he had something on his mind which he wanted to
say, but felt some hesitancy about broaching the subject. after beating
about the bush a little, he said suddenly:--

“friend john, there is something that you and i must talk of alone, just
at the first at any rate. later, we may have to take the others into our
confidence”; then he stopped, so i waited; he went on:--

“madam mina, our poor, dear madam mina is changing.” a cold shiver ran
through me to find my worst fears thus endorsed. van helsing
continued:--

“with the sad experience of miss lucy, we must this time be warned
before things go too far. our task is now in reality more difficult than
ever, and this new trouble makes every hour of the direst importance. i
can see the characteristics of the vampire coming in her face. it is now
but very, very slight; but it is to be seen if we have eyes to notice
without to prejudge. her teeth are some sharper, and at times her eyes
are more hard. but these are not all, there is to her the silence now
often; as so it was with miss lucy. she did not speak, even when she
wrote that which she wished to be known later. now my fear is this. if
it be that she can, by our hypnotic trance, tell what the count see and
hear, is it not more true that he who have hypnotise her first, and who
have drink of her very blood and make her drink of his, should, if he
will, compel her mind to disclose to him that which she know?” i nodded
acquiescence; he went on:--

“then, what we must do is to prevent this; we must keep her ignorant of
our intent, and so she cannot tell what she know not. this is a painful
task! oh, so painful that it heart-break me to think of; but it must be.
when to-day we meet, i must tell her that for reason which we will not
to speak she must not more be of our council, but be simply guarded by
us.” he wiped his forehead, which had broken out in profuse perspiration
at the thought of the pain which he might have to inflict upon the poor
soul already so tortured. i knew that it would be some sort of comfort
to him if i told him that i also had come to the same conclusion; for at
any rate it would take away the pain of doubt. i told him, and the
effect was as i expected.

it is now close to the time of our general gathering. van helsing has
gone away to prepare for the meeting, and his painful part of it. i
really believe his purpose is to be able to pray alone.

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--at the very outset of our meeting a great personal relief was
experienced by both van helsing and myself. mrs. harker had sent a
message by her husband to say that she would not join us at present, as
she thought it better that we should be free to discuss our movements
without her presence to embarrass us. the professor and i looked at each
other for an instant, and somehow we both seemed relieved. for my own
part, i thought that if mrs. harker realised the danger herself, it was
much pain as well as much danger averted. under the circumstances we
agreed, by a questioning look and answer, with finger on lip, to
preserve silence in our suspicions, until we should have been able to
confer alone again. we went at once into our plan of campaign. van
helsing roughly put the facts before us first:--

“the _czarina catherine_ left the thames yesterday morning. it will take
her at the quickest speed she has ever made at least three weeks to
reach varna; but we can travel overland to the same place in three days.
now, if we allow for two days less for the ship’s voyage, owing to such
weather influences as we know that the count can bring to bear; and if
we allow a whole day and night for any delays which may occur to us,
then we have a margin of nearly two weeks. thus, in order to be quite
safe, we must leave here on 17th at latest. then we shall at any rate
be in varna a day before the ship arrives, and able to make such
preparations as may be necessary. of course we shall all go armed--armed
against evil things, spiritual as well as physical.” here quincey morris
added:--

“i understand that the count comes from a wolf country, and it may be
that he shall get there before us. i propose that we add winchesters to
our armament. i have a kind of belief in a winchester when there is any
trouble of that sort around. do you remember, art, when we had the pack
after us at tobolsk? what wouldn’t we have given then for a repeater
apiece!”

“good!” said van helsing, “winchesters it shall be. quincey’s head is
level at all times, but most so when there is to hunt, metaphor be more
dishonour to science than wolves be of danger to man. in the meantime we
can do nothing here; and as i think that varna is not familiar to any of
us, why not go there more soon? it is as long to wait here as there.
to-night and to-morrow we can get ready, and then, if all be well, we
four can set out on our journey.”

“we four?” said harker interrogatively, looking from one to another of
us.

“of course!” answered the professor quickly, “you must remain to take
care of your so sweet wife!” harker was silent for awhile and then said
in a hollow voice:--

“let us talk of that part of it in the morning. i want to consult with
mina.” i thought that now was the time for van helsing to warn him not
to disclose our plans to her; but he took no notice. i looked at him
significantly and coughed. for answer he put his finger on his lips and
turned away.


_jonathan harker’s journal._

_5 october, afternoon._--for some time after our meeting this morning i
could not think. the new phases of things leave my mind in a state of
wonder which allows no room for active thought. mina’s determination not
to take any part in the discussion set me thinking; and as i could not
argue the matter with her, i could only guess. i am as far as ever from
a solution now. the way the others received it, too, puzzled me; the
last time we talked of the subject we agreed that there was to be no
more concealment of anything amongst us. mina is sleeping now, calmly
and sweetly like a little child. her lips are curved and her face beams
with happiness. thank god, there are such moments still for her.

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--how strange it all is. i sat watching mina’s happy sleep, and
came as near to being happy myself as i suppose i shall ever be. as the
evening drew on, and the earth took its shadows from the sun sinking
lower, the silence of the room grew more and more solemn to me. all at
once mina opened her eyes, and looking at me tenderly, said:--

“jonathan, i want you to promise me something on your word of honour. a
promise made to me, but made holily in god’s hearing, and not to be
broken though i should go down on my knees and implore you with bitter
tears. quick, you must make it to me at once.”

“mina,” i said, “a promise like that, i cannot make at once. i may have
no right to make it.”

“but, dear one,” she said, with such spiritual intensity that her eyes
were like pole stars, “it is i who wish it; and it is not for myself.
you can ask dr. van helsing if i am not right; if he disagrees you may
do as you will. nay, more, if you all agree, later, you are absolved
from the promise.”

“i promise!” i said, and for a moment she looked supremely happy; though
to me all happiness for her was denied by the red scar on her forehead.
she said:--

“promise me that you will not tell me anything of the plans formed for
the campaign against the count. not by word, or inference, or
implication; not at any time whilst this remains to me!” and she
solemnly pointed to the scar. i saw that she was in earnest, and said
solemnly:--

“i promise!” and as i said it i felt that from that instant a door had
been shut between us.

       *       *       *       *       *

_later, midnight._--mina has been bright and cheerful all the evening.
so much so that all the rest seemed to take courage, as if infected
somewhat with her gaiety; as a result even i myself felt as if the pall
of gloom which weighs us down were somewhat lifted. we all retired
early. mina is now sleeping like a little child; it is a wonderful thing
that her faculty of sleep remains to her in the midst of her terrible
trouble. thank god for it, for then at least she can forget her care.
perhaps her example may affect me as her gaiety did to-night. i shall
try it. oh! for a dreamless sleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

_6 october, morning._--another surprise. mina woke me early, about the
same time as yesterday, and asked me to bring dr. van helsing. i thought
that it was another occasion for hypnotism, and without question went
for the professor. he had evidently expected some such call, for i found
him dressed in his room. his door was ajar, so that he could hear the
opening of the door of our room. he came at once; as he passed into the
room, he asked mina if the others might come, too.

“no,” she said quite simply, “it will not be necessary. you can tell
them just as well. i must go with you on your journey.”

dr. van helsing was as startled as i was. after a moment’s pause he
asked:--

“but why?”

“you must take me with you. i am safer with you, and you shall be safer,
too.”

“but why, dear madam mina? you know that your safety is our solemnest
duty. we go into danger, to which you are, or may be, more liable than
any of us from--from circumstances--things that have been.” he paused,
embarrassed.

as she replied, she raised her finger and pointed to her forehead:--

“i know. that is why i must go. i can tell you now, whilst the sun is
coming up; i may not be able again. i know that when the count wills me
i must go. i know that if he tells me to come in secret, i must come by
wile; by any device to hoodwink--even jonathan.” god saw the look that
she turned on me as she spoke, and if there be indeed a recording angel
that look is noted to her everlasting honour. i could only clasp her
hand. i could not speak; my emotion was too great for even the relief of
tears. she went on:--

“you men are brave and strong. you are strong in your numbers, for you
can defy that which would break down the human endurance of one who had
to guard alone. besides, i may be of service, since you can hypnotise me
and so learn that which even i myself do not know.” dr. van helsing said
very gravely:--

“madam mina, you are, as always, most wise. you shall with us come; and
together we shall do that which we go forth to achieve.” when he had
spoken, mina’s long spell of silence made me look at her. she had fallen
back on her pillow asleep; she did not even wake when i had pulled up
the blind and let in the sunlight which flooded the room. van helsing
motioned to me to come with him quietly. we went to his room, and within
a minute lord godalming, dr. seward, and mr. morris were with us also.
he told them what mina had said, and went on:--

“in the morning we shall leave for varna. we have now to deal with a
new factor: madam mina. oh, but her soul is true. it is to her an agony
to tell us so much as she has done; but it is most right, and we are
warned in time. there must be no chance lost, and in varna we must be
ready to act the instant when that ship arrives.”

“what shall we do exactly?” asked mr. morris laconically. the professor
paused before replying:--

“we shall at the first board that ship; then, when we have identified
the box, we shall place a branch of the wild rose on it. this we shall
fasten, for when it is there none can emerge; so at least says the
superstition. and to superstition must we trust at the first; it was
man’s faith in the early, and it have its root in faith still. then,
when we get the opportunity that we seek, when none are near to see, we
shall open the box, and--and all will be well.”

“i shall not wait for any opportunity,” said morris. “when i see the box
i shall open it and destroy the monster, though there were a thousand
men looking on, and if i am to be wiped out for it the next moment!” i
grasped his hand instinctively and found it as firm as a piece of steel.
i think he understood my look; i hope he did.

“good boy,” said dr. van helsing. “brave boy. quincey is all man. god
bless him for it. my child, believe me none of us shall lag behind or
pause from any fear. i do but say what we may do--what we must do. but,
indeed, indeed we cannot say what we shall do. there are so many things
which may happen, and their ways and their ends are so various that
until the moment we may not say. we shall all be armed, in all ways; and
when the time for the end has come, our effort shall not be lack. now
let us to-day put all our affairs in order. let all things which touch
on others dear to us, and who on us depend, be complete; for none of us
can tell what, or when, or how, the end may be. as for me, my own
affairs are regulate; and as i have nothing else to do, i shall go make
arrangements for the travel. i shall have all tickets and so forth for
our journey.”

there was nothing further to be said, and we parted. i shall now settle
up all my affairs of earth, and be ready for whatever may come....

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--it is all done; my will is made, and all complete. mina if she
survive is my sole heir. if it should not be so, then the others who
have been so good to us shall have remainder.

it is now drawing towards the sunset; mina’s uneasiness calls my
attention to it. i am sure that there is something on her mind which the
time of exact sunset will reveal. these occasions are becoming harrowing
times for us all, for each sunrise and sunset opens up some new
danger--some new pain, which, however, may in god’s will be means to a
good end. i write all these things in the diary since my darling must
not hear them now; but if it may be that she can see them again, they
shall be ready.

she is calling to me.




chapter xxv

dr. seward’s diary


_11 october, evening._--jonathan harker has asked me to note this, as he
says he is hardly equal to the task, and he wants an exact record kept.

i think that none of us were surprised when we were asked to see mrs.
harker a little before the time of sunset. we have of late come to
understand that sunrise and sunset are to her times of peculiar freedom;
when her old self can be manifest without any controlling force subduing
or restraining her, or inciting her to action. this mood or condition
begins some half hour or more before actual sunrise or sunset, and lasts
till either the sun is high, or whilst the clouds are still aglow with
the rays streaming above the horizon. at first there is a sort of
negative condition, as if some tie were loosened, and then the absolute
freedom quickly follows; when, however, the freedom ceases the
change-back or relapse comes quickly, preceded only by a spell of
warning silence.

to-night, when we met, she was somewhat constrained, and bore all the
signs of an internal struggle. i put it down myself to her making a
violent effort at the earliest instant she could do so. a very few
minutes, however, gave her complete control of herself; then, motioning
her husband to sit beside her on the sofa where she was half reclining,
she made the rest of us bring chairs up close. taking her husband’s hand
in hers began:--

“we are all here together in freedom, for perhaps the last time! i know,
dear; i know that you will always be with me to the end.” this was to
her husband whose hand had, as we could see, tightened upon hers. “in
the morning we go out upon our task, and god alone knows what may be in
store for any of us. you are going to be so good to me as to take me
with you. i know that all that brave earnest men can do for a poor weak
woman, whose soul perhaps is lost--no, no, not yet, but is at any rate
at stake--you will do. but you must remember that i am not as you are.
there is a poison in my blood, in my soul, which may destroy me; which
must destroy me, unless some relief comes to us. oh, my friends, you
know as well as i do, that my soul is at stake; and though i know there
is one way out for me, you must not and i must not take it!” she looked
appealingly to us all in turn, beginning and ending with her husband.

“what is that way?” asked van helsing in a hoarse voice. “what is that
way, which we must not--may not--take?”

“that i may die now, either by my own hand or that of another, before
the greater evil is entirely wrought. i know, and you know, that were i
once dead you could and would set free my immortal spirit, even as you
did my poor lucy’s. were death, or the fear of death, the only thing
that stood in the way i would not shrink to die here, now, amidst the
friends who love me. but death is not all. i cannot believe that to die
in such a case, when there is hope before us and a bitter task to be
done, is god’s will. therefore, i, on my part, give up here the
certainty of eternal rest, and go out into the dark where may be the
blackest things that the world or the nether world holds!” we were all
silent, for we knew instinctively that this was only a prelude. the
faces of the others were set and harker’s grew ashen grey; perhaps he
guessed better than any of us what was coming. she continued:--

“this is what i can give into the hotch-pot.” i could not but note the
quaint legal phrase which she used in such a place, and with all
seriousness. “what will each of you give? your lives i know,” she went
on quickly, “that is easy for brave men. your lives are god’s, and you
can give them back to him; but what will you give to me?” she looked
again questioningly, but this time avoided her husband’s face. quincey
seemed to understand; he nodded, and her face lit up. “then i shall tell
you plainly what i want, for there must be no doubtful matter in this
connection between us now. you must promise me, one and all--even you,
my beloved husband--that, should the time come, you will kill me.”

“what is that time?” the voice was quincey’s, but it was low and
strained.

“when you shall be convinced that i am so changed that it is better that
i die than i may live. when i am thus dead in the flesh, then you will,
without a moment’s delay, drive a stake through me and cut off my head;
or do whatever else may be wanting to give me rest!”

quincey was the first to rise after the pause. he knelt down before her
and taking her hand in his said solemnly:--

“i’m only a rough fellow, who hasn’t, perhaps, lived as a man should to
win such a distinction, but i swear to you by all that i hold sacred and
dear that, should the time ever come, i shall not flinch from the duty
that you have set us. and i promise you, too, that i shall make all
certain, for if i am only doubtful i shall take it that the time has
come!”

“my true friend!” was all she could say amid her fast-falling tears, as,
bending over, she kissed his hand.

“i swear the same, my dear madam mina!” said van helsing.

“and i!” said lord godalming, each of them in turn kneeling to her to
take the oath. i followed, myself. then her husband turned to her
wan-eyed and with a greenish pallor which subdued the snowy whiteness of
his hair, and asked:--

“and must i, too, make such a promise, oh, my wife?”

“you too, my dearest,” she said, with infinite yearning of pity in her
voice and eyes. “you must not shrink. you are nearest and dearest and
all the world to me; our souls are knit into one, for all life and all
time. think, dear, that there have been times when brave men have killed
their wives and their womenkind, to keep them from falling into the
hands of the enemy. their hands did not falter any the more because
those that they loved implored them to slay them. it is men’s duty
towards those whom they love, in such times of sore trial! and oh, my
dear, if it is to be that i must meet death at any hand, let it be at
the hand of him that loves me best. dr. van helsing, i have not
forgotten your mercy in poor lucy’s case to him who loved”--she stopped
with a flying blush, and changed her phrase--“to him who had best right
to give her peace. if that time shall come again, i look to you to make
it a happy memory of my husband’s life that it was his loving hand which
set me free from the awful thrall upon me.”

“again i swear!” came the professor’s resonant voice. mrs. harker
smiled, positively smiled, as with a sigh of relief she leaned back and
said:--

“and now one word of warning, a warning which you must never forget:
this time, if it ever come, may come quickly and unexpectedly, and in
such case you must lose no time in using your opportunity. at such a
time i myself might be--nay! if the time ever comes, _shall be_--leagued
with your enemy against you.”

“one more request;” she became very solemn as she said this, “it is not
vital and necessary like the other, but i want you to do one thing for
me, if you will.” we all acquiesced, but no one spoke; there was no need
to speak:--

“i want you to read the burial service.” she was interrupted by a deep
groan from her husband; taking his hand in hers, she held it over her
heart, and continued: “you must read it over me some day. whatever may
be the issue of all this fearful state of things, it will be a sweet
thought to all or some of us. you, my dearest, will i hope read it, for
then it will be in your voice in my memory for ever--come what may!”

“but oh, my dear one,” he pleaded, “death is afar off from you.”

“nay,” she said, holding up a warning hand. “i am deeper in death at
this moment than if the weight of an earthly grave lay heavy upon me!”

“oh, my wife, must i read it?” he said, before he began.

“it would comfort me, my husband!” was all she said; and he began to
read when she had got the book ready.

“how can i--how could any one--tell of that strange scene, its
solemnity, its gloom, its sadness, its horror; and, withal, its
sweetness. even a sceptic, who can see nothing but a travesty of bitter
truth in anything holy or emotional, would have been melted to the heart
had he seen that little group of loving and devoted friends kneeling
round that stricken and sorrowing lady; or heard the tender passion of
her husband’s voice, as in tones so broken with emotion that often he
had to pause, he read the simple and beautiful service from the burial
of the dead. i--i cannot go on--words--and--v-voice--f-fail m-me!”

       *       *       *       *       *

she was right in her instinct. strange as it all was, bizarre as it may
hereafter seem even to us who felt its potent influence at the time, it
comforted us much; and the silence, which showed mrs. harker’s coming
relapse from her freedom of soul, did not seem so full of despair to any
of us as we had dreaded.


_jonathan harker’s journal._

_15 october, varna._--we left charing cross on the morning of the 12th,
got to paris the same night, and took the places secured for us in the
orient express. we travelled night and day, arriving here at about five
o’clock. lord godalming went to the consulate to see if any telegram had
arrived for him, whilst the rest of us came on to this hotel--“the
odessus.” the journey may have had incidents; i was, however, too eager
to get on, to care for them. until the _czarina catherine_ comes into
port there will be no interest for me in anything in the wide world.
thank god! mina is well, and looks to be getting stronger; her colour is
coming back. she sleeps a great deal; throughout the journey she slept
nearly all the time. before sunrise and sunset, however, she is very
wakeful and alert; and it has become a habit for van helsing to
hypnotise her at such times. at first, some effort was needed, and he
had to make many passes; but now, she seems to yield at once, as if by
habit, and scarcely any action is needed. he seems to have power at
these particular moments to simply will, and her thoughts obey him. he
always asks her what she can see and hear. she answers to the first:--

“nothing; all is dark.” and to the second:--

“i can hear the waves lapping against the ship, and the water rushing
by. canvas and cordage strain and masts and yards creak. the wind is
high--i can hear it in the shrouds, and the bow throws back the foam.”
it is evident that the _czarina catherine_ is still at sea, hastening on
her way to varna. lord godalming has just returned. he had four
telegrams, one each day since we started, and all to the same effect:
that the _czarina catherine_ had not been reported to lloyd’s from
anywhere. he had arranged before leaving london that his agent should
send him every day a telegram saying if the ship had been reported. he
was to have a message even if she were not reported, so that he might be
sure that there was a watch being kept at the other end of the wire.

we had dinner and went to bed early. to-morrow we are to see the
vice-consul, and to arrange, if we can, about getting on board the ship
as soon as she arrives. van helsing says that our chance will be to get
on the boat between sunrise and sunset. the count, even if he takes the
form of a bat, cannot cross the running water of his own volition, and
so cannot leave the ship. as he dare not change to man’s form without
suspicion--which he evidently wishes to avoid--he must remain in the
box. if, then, we can come on board after sunrise, he is at our mercy;
for we can open the box and make sure of him, as we did of poor lucy,
before he wakes. what mercy he shall get from us will not count for
much. we think that we shall not have much trouble with officials or the
seamen. thank god! this is the country where bribery can do anything,
and we are well supplied with money. we have only to make sure that the
ship cannot come into port between sunset and sunrise without our being
warned, and we shall be safe. judge moneybag will settle this case, i
think!

       *       *       *       *       *

_16 october._--mina’s report still the same: lapping waves and rushing
water, darkness and favouring winds. we are evidently in good time, and
when we hear of the _czarina catherine_ we shall be ready. as she must
pass the dardanelles we are sure to have some report.

       *       *       *       *       *

_17 october._--everything is pretty well fixed now, i think, to welcome
the count on his return from his tour. godalming told the shippers that
he fancied that the box sent aboard might contain something stolen from
a friend of his, and got a half consent that he might open it at his own
risk. the owner gave him a paper telling the captain to give him every
facility in doing whatever he chose on board the ship, and also a
similar authorisation to his agent at varna. we have seen the agent, who
was much impressed with godalming’s kindly manner to him, and we are all
satisfied that whatever he can do to aid our wishes will be done. we
have already arranged what to do in case we get the box open. if the
count is there, van helsing and seward will cut off his head at once and
drive a stake through his heart. morris and godalming and i shall
prevent interference, even if we have to use the arms which we shall
have ready. the professor says that if we can so treat the count’s body,
it will soon after fall into dust. in such case there would be no
evidence against us, in case any suspicion of murder were aroused. but
even if it were not, we should stand or fall by our act, and perhaps
some day this very script may be evidence to come between some of us and
a rope. for myself, i should take the chance only too thankfully if it
were to come. we mean to leave no stone unturned to carry out our
intent. we have arranged with certain officials that the instant the
_czarina catherine_ is seen, we are to be informed by a special
messenger.

       *       *       *       *       *

_24 october._--a whole week of waiting. daily telegrams to godalming,
but only the same story: “not yet reported.” mina’s morning and evening
hypnotic answer is unvaried: lapping waves, rushing water, and creaking
masts.

_telegram, october 24th._

_rufus smith, lloyd’s, london, to lord godalming, care of h. b. m.
vice-consul, varna._

“_czarina catherine_ reported this morning from dardanelles.”


_dr. seward’s diary._

_25 october._--how i miss my phonograph! to write diary with a pen is
irksome to me; but van helsing says i must. we were all wild with
excitement yesterday when godalming got his telegram from lloyd’s. i
know now what men feel in battle when the call to action is heard. mrs.
harker, alone of our party, did not show any signs of emotion. after
all, it is not strange that she did not; for we took special care not to
let her know anything about it, and we all tried not to show any
excitement when we were in her presence. in old days she would, i am
sure, have noticed, no matter how we might have tried to conceal it; but
in this way she is greatly changed during the past three weeks. the
lethargy grows upon her, and though she seems strong and well, and is
getting back some of her colour, van helsing and i are not satisfied. we
talk of her often; we have not, however, said a word to the others. it
would break poor harker’s heart--certainly his nerve--if he knew that we
had even a suspicion on the subject. van helsing examines, he tells me,
her teeth very carefully, whilst she is in the hypnotic condition, for
he says that so long as they do not begin to sharpen there is no active
danger of a change in her. if this change should come, it would be
necessary to take steps!... we both know what those steps would have to
be, though we do not mention our thoughts to each other. we should
neither of us shrink from the task--awful though it be to contemplate.
“euthanasia” is an excellent and a comforting word! i am grateful to
whoever invented it.

it is only about 24 hours’ sail from the dardanelles to here, at the
rate the _czarina catherine_ has come from london. she should therefore
arrive some time in the morning; but as she cannot possibly get in
before then, we are all about to retire early. we shall get up at one
o’clock, so as to be ready.

       *       *       *       *       *

_25 october, noon_.--no news yet of the ship’s arrival. mrs. harker’s
hypnotic report this morning was the same as usual, so it is possible
that we may get news at any moment. we men are all in a fever of
excitement, except harker, who is calm; his hands are cold as ice, and
an hour ago i found him whetting the edge of the great ghoorka knife
which he now always carries with him. it will be a bad lookout for the
count if the edge of that “kukri” ever touches his throat, driven by
that stern, ice-cold hand!

van helsing and i were a little alarmed about mrs. harker to-day. about
noon she got into a sort of lethargy which we did not like; although we
kept silence to the others, we were neither of us happy about it. she
had been restless all the morning, so that we were at first glad to know
that she was sleeping. when, however, her husband mentioned casually
that she was sleeping so soundly that he could not wake her, we went to
her room to see for ourselves. she was breathing naturally and looked so
well and peaceful that we agreed that the sleep was better for her than
anything else. poor girl, she has so much to forget that it is no wonder
that sleep, if it brings oblivion to her, does her good.

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--our opinion was justified, for when after a refreshing sleep
of some hours she woke up, she seemed brighter and better than she had
been for days. at sunset she made the usual hypnotic report. wherever he
may be in the black sea, the count is hurrying to his destination. to
his doom, i trust!

       *       *       *       *       *

_26 october._--another day and no tidings of the _czarina catherine_.
she ought to be here by now. that she is still journeying _somewhere_ is
apparent, for mrs. harker’s hypnotic report at sunrise was still the
same. it is possible that the vessel may be lying by, at times, for fog;
some of the steamers which came in last evening reported patches of fog
both to north and south of the port. we must continue our watching, as
the ship may now be signalled any moment.

       *       *       *       *       *

_27 october, noon._--most strange; no news yet of the ship we wait for.
mrs. harker reported last night and this morning as usual: “lapping
waves and rushing water,” though she added that “the waves were very
faint.” the telegrams from london have been the same: “no further
report.” van helsing is terribly anxious, and told me just now that he
fears the count is escaping us. he added significantly:--

“i did not like that lethargy of madam mina’s. souls and memories can do
strange things during trance.” i was about to ask him more, but harker
just then came in, and he held up a warning hand. we must try to-night
at sunset to make her speak more fully when in her hypnotic state.

       *       *       *       *       *

     _28 october._--telegram. _rufus smith, london, to lord godalming,
     care h. b. m. vice consul, varna._

     “_czarina catherine_ reported entering galatz at one o’clock
     to-day.”


_dr. seward’s diary._

_28 october._--when the telegram came announcing the arrival in galatz i
do not think it was such a shock to any of us as might have been
expected. true, we did not know whence, or how, or when, the bolt would
come; but i think we all expected that something strange would happen.
the delay of arrival at varna made us individually satisfied that things
would not be just as we had expected; we only waited to learn where the
change would occur. none the less, however, was it a surprise. i suppose
that nature works on such a hopeful basis that we believe against
ourselves that things will be as they ought to be, not as we should know
that they will be. transcendentalism is a beacon to the angels, even if
it be a will-o’-the-wisp to man. it was an odd experience and we all
took it differently. van helsing raised his hand over his head for a
moment, as though in remonstrance with the almighty; but he said not a
word, and in a few seconds stood up with his face sternly set. lord
godalming grew very pale, and sat breathing heavily. i was myself half
stunned and looked in wonder at one after another. quincey morris
tightened his belt with that quick movement which i knew so well; in our
old wandering days it meant “action.” mrs. harker grew ghastly white, so
that the scar on her forehead seemed to burn, but she folded her hands
meekly and looked up in prayer. harker smiled--actually smiled--the
dark, bitter smile of one who is without hope; but at the same time his
action belied his words, for his hands instinctively sought the hilt of
the great kukri knife and rested there. “when does the next train start
for galatz?” said van helsing to us generally.

“at 6:30 to-morrow morning!” we all started, for the answer came from
mrs. harker.

“how on earth do you know?” said art.

“you forget--or perhaps you do not know, though jonathan does and so
does dr. van helsing--that i am the train fiend. at home in exeter i
always used to make up the time-tables, so as to be helpful to my
husband. i found it so useful sometimes, that i always make a study of
the time-tables now. i knew that if anything were to take us to castle
dracula we should go by galatz, or at any rate through bucharest, so i
learned the times very carefully. unhappily there are not many to learn,
as the only train to-morrow leaves as i say.”

“wonderful woman!” murmured the professor.

“can’t we get a special?” asked lord godalming. van helsing shook his
head: “i fear not. this land is very different from yours or mine; even
if we did have a special, it would probably not arrive as soon as our
regular train. moreover, we have something to prepare. we must think.
now let us organize. you, friend arthur, go to the train and get the
tickets and arrange that all be ready for us to go in the morning. do
you, friend jonathan, go to the agent of the ship and get from him
letters to the agent in galatz, with authority to make search the ship
just as it was here. morris quincey, you see the vice-consul, and get
his aid with his fellow in galatz and all he can do to make our way
smooth, so that no times be lost when over the danube. john will stay
with madam mina and me, and we shall consult. for so if time be long you
may be delayed; and it will not matter when the sun set, since i am here
with madam to make report.”

“and i,” said mrs. harker brightly, and more like her old self than she
had been for many a long day, “shall try to be of use in all ways, and
shall think and write for you as i used to do. something is shifting
from me in some strange way, and i feel freer than i have been of late!”
the three younger men looked happier at the moment as they seemed to
realise the significance of her words; but van helsing and i, turning to
each other, met each a grave and troubled glance. we said nothing at the
time, however.

when the three men had gone out to their tasks van helsing asked mrs.
harker to look up the copy of the diaries and find him the part of
harker’s journal at the castle. she went away to get it; when the door
was shut upon her he said to me:--

“we mean the same! speak out!”

“there is some change. it is a hope that makes me sick, for it may
deceive us.”

“quite so. do you know why i asked her to get the manuscript?”

“no!” said i, “unless it was to get an opportunity of seeing me alone.”

“you are in part right, friend john, but only in part. i want to tell
you something. and oh, my friend, i am taking a great--a terrible--risk;
but i believe it is right. in the moment when madam mina said those
words that arrest both our understanding, an inspiration came to me. in
the trance of three days ago the count sent her his spirit to read her
mind; or more like he took her to see him in his earth-box in the ship
with water rushing, just as it go free at rise and set of sun. he learn
then that we are here; for she have more to tell in her open life with
eyes to see and ears to hear than he, shut, as he is, in his coffin-box.
now he make his most effort to escape us. at present he want her not.

“he is sure with his so great knowledge that she will come at his call;
but he cut her off--take her, as he can do, out of his own power, that
so she come not to him. ah! there i have hope that our man-brains that
have been of man so long and that have not lost the grace of god, will
come higher than his child-brain that lie in his tomb for centuries,
that grow not yet to our stature, and that do only work selfish and
therefore small. here comes madam mina; not a word to her of her trance!
she know it not; and it would overwhelm her and make despair just when
we want all her hope, all her courage; when most we want all her great
brain which is trained like man’s brain, but is of sweet woman and have
a special power which the count give her, and which he may not take away
altogether--though he think not so. hush! let me speak, and you shall
learn. oh, john, my friend, we are in awful straits. i fear, as i never
feared before. we can only trust the good god. silence! here she comes!”

i thought that the professor was going to break down and have hysterics,
just as he had when lucy died, but with a great effort he controlled
himself and was at perfect nervous poise when mrs. harker tripped into
the room, bright and happy-looking and, in the doing of work, seemingly
forgetful of her misery. as she came in, she handed a number of sheets
of typewriting to van helsing. he looked over them gravely, his face
brightening up as he read. then holding the pages between his finger and
thumb he said:--

“friend john, to you with so much of experience already--and you, too,
dear madam mina, that are young--here is a lesson: do not fear ever to
think. a half-thought has been buzzing often in my brain, but i fear to
let him loose his wings. here now, with more knowledge, i go back to
where that half-thought come from and i find that he be no half-thought
at all; that be a whole thought, though so young that he is not yet
strong to use his little wings. nay, like the “ugly duck” of my friend
hans andersen, he be no duck-thought at all, but a big swan-thought that
sail nobly on big wings, when the time come for him to try them. see i
read here what jonathan have written:--

“that other of his race who, in a later age, again and again, brought
his forces over the great river into turkey land; who, when he was
beaten back, came again, and again, and again, though he had to come
alone from the bloody field where his troops were being slaughtered,
since he knew that he alone could ultimately triumph.”

“what does this tell us? not much? no! the count’s child-thought see
nothing; therefore he speak so free. your man-thought see nothing; my
man-thought see nothing, till just now. no! but there comes another word
from some one who speak without thought because she, too, know not what
it mean--what it _might_ mean. just as there are elements which rest,
yet when in nature’s course they move on their way and they touch--then
pouf! and there comes a flash of light, heaven wide, that blind and kill
and destroy some; but that show up all earth below for leagues and
leagues. is it not so? well, i shall explain. to begin, have you ever
study the philosophy of crime? ‘yes’ and ‘no.’ you, john, yes; for it is
a study of insanity. you, no, madam mina; for crime touch you not--not
but once. still, your mind works true, and argues not _a particulari ad
universale_. there is this peculiarity in criminals. it is so constant,
in all countries and at all times, that even police, who know not much
from philosophy, come to know it empirically, that _it is_. that is to
be empiric. the criminal always work at one crime--that is the true
criminal who seems predestinate to crime, and who will of none other.
this criminal has not full man-brain. he is clever and cunning and
resourceful; but he be not of man-stature as to brain. he be of
child-brain in much. now this criminal of ours is predestinate to crime
also; he, too, have child-brain, and it is of the child to do what he
have done. the little bird, the little fish, the little animal learn not
by principle, but empirically; and when he learn to do, then there is to
him the ground to start from to do more. ‘_dos pou sto_,’ said
archimedes. ‘give me a fulcrum, and i shall move the world!’ to do once,
is the fulcrum whereby child-brain become man-brain; and until he have
the purpose to do more, he continue to do the same again every time,
just as he have done before! oh, my dear, i see that your eyes are
opened, and that to you the lightning flash show all the leagues,” for
mrs. harker began to clap her hands and her eyes sparkled. he went on:--

“now you shall speak. tell us two dry men of science what you see with
those so bright eyes.” he took her hand and held it whilst she spoke.
his finger and thumb closed on her pulse, as i thought instinctively and
unconsciously, as she spoke:--

“the count is a criminal and of criminal type. nordau and lombroso would
so classify him, and _quâ_ criminal he is of imperfectly formed mind.
thus, in a difficulty he has to seek resource in habit. his past is a
clue, and the one page of it that we know--and that from his own
lips--tells that once before, when in what mr. morris would call a
‘tight place,’ he went back to his own country from the land he had
tried to invade, and thence, without losing purpose, prepared himself
for a new effort. he came again better equipped for his work; and won.
so he came to london to invade a new land. he was beaten, and when all
hope of success was lost, and his existence in danger, he fled back over
the sea to his home; just as formerly he had fled back over the danube
from turkey land.”

“good, good! oh, you so clever lady!” said van helsing,
enthusiastically, as he stooped and kissed her hand. a moment later he
said to me, as calmly as though we had been having a sick-room
consultation:--

“seventy-two only; and in all this excitement. i have hope.” turning to
her again, he said with keen expectation:--

“but go on. go on! there is more to tell if you will. be not afraid;
john and i know. i do in any case, and shall tell you if you are right.
speak, without fear!”

“i will try to; but you will forgive me if i seem egotistical.”

“nay! fear not, you must be egotist, for it is of you that we think.”

“then, as he is criminal he is selfish; and as his intellect is small
and his action is based on selfishness, he confines himself to one
purpose. that purpose is remorseless. as he fled back over the danube,
leaving his forces to be cut to pieces, so now he is intent on being
safe, careless of all. so his own selfishness frees my soul somewhat
from the terrible power which he acquired over me on that dreadful
night. i felt it! oh, i felt it! thank god, for his great mercy! my soul
is freer than it has been since that awful hour; and all that haunts me
is a fear lest in some trance or dream he may have used my knowledge for
his ends.” the professor stood up:--

“he has so used your mind; and by it he has left us here in varna,
whilst the ship that carried him rushed through enveloping fog up to
galatz, where, doubtless, he had made preparation for escaping from us.
but his child-mind only saw so far; and it may be that, as ever is in
god’s providence, the very thing that the evil-doer most reckoned on for
his selfish good, turns out to be his chiefest harm. the hunter is taken
in his own snare, as the great psalmist says. for now that he think he
is free from every trace of us all, and that he has escaped us with so
many hours to him, then his selfish child-brain will whisper him to
sleep. he think, too, that as he cut himself off from knowing your mind,
there can be no knowledge of him to you; there is where he fail! that
terrible baptism of blood which he give you makes you free to go to him
in spirit, as you have as yet done in your times of freedom, when the
sun rise and set. at such times you go by my volition and not by his;
and this power to good of you and others, as you have won from your
suffering at his hands. this is now all the more precious that he know
it not, and to guard himself have even cut himself off from his
knowledge of our where. we, however, are not selfish, and we believe
that god is with us through all this blackness, and these many dark
hours. we shall follow him; and we shall not flinch; even if we peril
ourselves that we become like him. friend john, this has been a great
hour; and it have done much to advance us on our way. you must be scribe
and write him all down, so that when the others return from their work
you can give it to them; then they shall know as we do.”

and so i have written it whilst we wait their return, and mrs. harker
has written with her typewriter all since she brought the ms. to us.




chapter xxvi

dr. seward’s diary


_29 october._--this is written in the train from varna to galatz. last
night we all assembled a little before the time of sunset. each of us
had done his work as well as he could; so far as thought, and endeavour,
and opportunity go, we are prepared for the whole of our journey, and
for our work when we get to galatz. when the usual time came round mrs.
harker prepared herself for her hypnotic effort; and after a longer and
more serious effort on the part of van helsing than has been usually
necessary, she sank into the trance. usually she speaks on a hint; but
this time the professor had to ask her questions, and to ask them pretty
resolutely, before we could learn anything; at last her answer came:--

“i can see nothing; we are still; there are no waves lapping, but only a
steady swirl of water softly running against the hawser. i can hear
men’s voices calling, near and far, and the roll and creak of oars in
the rowlocks. a gun is fired somewhere; the echo of it seems far away.
there is tramping of feet overhead, and ropes and chains are dragged
along. what is this? there is a gleam of light; i can feel the air
blowing upon me.”

here she stopped. she had risen, as if impulsively, from where she lay
on the sofa, and raised both her hands, palms upwards, as if lifting a
weight. van helsing and i looked at each other with understanding.
quincey raised his eyebrows slightly and looked at her intently, whilst
harker’s hand instinctively closed round the hilt of his kukri. there
was a long pause. we all knew that the time when she could speak was
passing; but we felt that it was useless to say anything. suddenly she
sat up, and, as she opened her eyes, said sweetly:--

“would none of you like a cup of tea? you must all be so tired!” we
could only make her happy, and so acquiesced. she bustled off to get
tea; when she had gone van helsing said:--

“you see, my friends. _he_ is close to land: he has left his
earth-chest. but he has yet to get on shore. in the night he may lie
hidden somewhere; but if he be not carried on shore, or if the ship do
not touch it, he cannot achieve the land. in such case he can, if it be
in the night, change his form and can jump or fly on shore, as he did
at whitby. but if the day come before he get on shore, then, unless he
be carried he cannot escape. and if he be carried, then the customs men
may discover what the box contain. thus, in fine, if he escape not on
shore to-night, or before dawn, there will be the whole day lost to him.
we may then arrive in time; for if he escape not at night we shall come
on him in daytime, boxed up and at our mercy; for he dare not be his
true self, awake and visible, lest he be discovered.”

there was no more to be said, so we waited in patience until the dawn;
at which time we might learn more from mrs. harker.

early this morning we listened, with breathless anxiety, for her
response in her trance. the hypnotic stage was even longer in coming
than before; and when it came the time remaining until full sunrise was
so short that we began to despair. van helsing seemed to throw his whole
soul into the effort; at last, in obedience to his will she made
reply:--

“all is dark. i hear lapping water, level with me, and some creaking as
of wood on wood.” she paused, and the red sun shot up. we must wait till
to-night.

and so it is that we are travelling towards galatz in an agony of
expectation. we are due to arrive between two and three in the morning;
but already, at bucharest, we are three hours late, so we cannot
possibly get in till well after sun-up. thus we shall have two more
hypnotic messages from mrs. harker; either or both may possibly throw
more light on what is happening.

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--sunset has come and gone. fortunately it came at a time when
there was no distraction; for had it occurred whilst we were at a
station, we might not have secured the necessary calm and isolation.
mrs. harker yielded to the hypnotic influence even less readily than
this morning. i am in fear that her power of reading the count’s
sensations may die away, just when we want it most. it seems to me that
her imagination is beginning to work. whilst she has been in the trance
hitherto she has confined herself to the simplest of facts. if this goes
on it may ultimately mislead us. if i thought that the count’s power
over her would die away equally with her power of knowledge it would be
a happy thought; but i am afraid that it may not be so. when she did
speak, her words were enigmatical:--

“something is going out; i can feel it pass me like a cold wind. i can
hear, far off, confused sounds--as of men talking in strange tongues,
fierce-falling water, and the howling of wolves.” she stopped and a
shudder ran through her, increasing in intensity for a few seconds,
till, at the end, she shook as though in a palsy. she said no more, even
in answer to the professor’s imperative questioning. when she woke from
the trance, she was cold, and exhausted, and languid; but her mind was
all alert. she could not remember anything, but asked what she had said;
when she was told, she pondered over it deeply for a long time and in
silence.

       *       *       *       *       *

_30 october, 7 a. m._--we are near galatz now, and i may not have time
to write later. sunrise this morning was anxiously looked for by us all.
knowing of the increasing difficulty of procuring the hypnotic trance,
van helsing began his passes earlier than usual. they produced no
effect, however, until the regular time, when she yielded with a still
greater difficulty, only a minute before the sun rose. the professor
lost no time in his questioning; her answer came with equal quickness:--

“all is dark. i hear water swirling by, level with my ears, and the
creaking of wood on wood. cattle low far off. there is another sound, a
queer one like----” she stopped and grew white, and whiter still.

“go on; go on! speak, i command you!” said van helsing in an agonised
voice. at the same time there was despair in his eyes, for the risen sun
was reddening even mrs. harker’s pale face. she opened her eyes, and we
all started as she said, sweetly and seemingly with the utmost
unconcern:--

“oh, professor, why ask me to do what you know i can’t? i don’t remember
anything.” then, seeing the look of amazement on our faces, she said,
turning from one to the other with a troubled look:--

“what have i said? what have i done? i know nothing, only that i was
lying here, half asleep, and heard you say ‘go on! speak, i command you!’
it seemed so funny to hear you order me about, as if i were a bad
child!”

“oh, madam mina,” he said, sadly, “it is proof, if proof be needed, of
how i love and honour you, when a word for your good, spoken more
earnest than ever, can seem so strange because it is to order her whom i
am proud to obey!”

the whistles are sounding; we are nearing galatz. we are on fire with
anxiety and eagerness.


_mina harker’s journal._

_30 october._--mr. morris took me to the hotel where our rooms had been
ordered by telegraph, he being the one who could best be spared, since
he does not speak any foreign language. the forces were distributed
much as they had been at varna, except that lord godalming went to the
vice-consul, as his rank might serve as an immediate guarantee of some
sort to the official, we being in extreme hurry. jonathan and the two
doctors went to the shipping agent to learn particulars of the arrival
of the _czarina catherine_.

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--lord godalming has returned. the consul is away, and the
vice-consul sick; so the routine work has been attended to by a clerk.
he was very obliging, and offered to do anything in his power.


_jonathan harker’s journal._

_30 october._--at nine o’clock dr. van helsing, dr. seward, and i called
on messrs. mackenzie & steinkoff, the agents of the london firm of
hapgood. they had received a wire from london, in answer to lord
godalming’s telegraphed request, asking us to show them any civility in
their power. they were more than kind and courteous, and took us at once
on board the _czarina catherine_, which lay at anchor out in the river
harbour. there we saw the captain, donelson by name, who told us of his
voyage. he said that in all his life he had never had so favourable a
run.

“man!” he said, “but it made us afeard, for we expeckit that we should
have to pay for it wi’ some rare piece o’ ill luck, so as to keep up the
average. it’s no canny to run frae london to the black sea wi’ a wind
ahint ye, as though the deil himself were blawin’ on yer sail for his
ain purpose. an’ a’ the time we could no speer a thing. gin we were nigh
a ship, or a port, or a headland, a fog fell on us and travelled wi’ us,
till when after it had lifted and we looked out, the deil a thing could
we see. we ran by gibraltar wi’oot bein’ able to signal; an’ till we
came to the dardanelles and had to wait to get our permit to pass, we
never were within hail o’ aught. at first i inclined to slack off sail
and beat about till the fog was lifted; but whiles, i thocht that if the
deil was minded to get us into the black sea quick, he was like to do it
whether we would or no. if we had a quick voyage it would be no to our
miscredit wi’ the owners, or no hurt to our traffic; an’ the old mon who
had served his ain purpose wad be decently grateful to us for no
hinderin’ him.” this mixture of simplicity and cunning, of superstition
and commercial reasoning, aroused van helsing, who said:--

“mine friend, that devil is more clever than he is thought by some; and
he know when he meet his match!” the skipper was not displeased with the
compliment, and went on:--

“when we got past the bosphorus the men began to grumble; some o’ them,
the roumanians, came and asked me to heave overboard a big box which had
been put on board by a queer lookin’ old man just before we had started
frae london. i had seen them speer at the fellow, and put out their twa
fingers when they saw him, to guard against the evil eye. man! but the
supersteetion of foreigners is pairfectly rideeculous! i sent them aboot
their business pretty quick; but as just after a fog closed in on us i
felt a wee bit as they did anent something, though i wouldn’t say it was
agin the big box. well, on we went, and as the fog didn’t let up for
five days i joost let the wind carry us; for if the deil wanted to get
somewheres--well, he would fetch it up a’reet. an’ if he didn’t, well,
we’d keep a sharp lookout anyhow. sure eneuch, we had a fair way and
deep water all the time; and two days ago, when the mornin’ sun came
through the fog, we found ourselves just in the river opposite galatz.
the roumanians were wild, and wanted me right or wrong to take out the
box and fling it in the river. i had to argy wi’ them aboot it wi’ a
handspike; an’ when the last o’ them rose off the deck wi’ his head in
his hand, i had convinced them that, evil eye or no evil eye, the
property and the trust of my owners were better in my hands than in the
river danube. they had, mind ye, taken the box on the deck ready to
fling in, and as it was marked galatz _via_ varna, i thocht i’d let it
lie till we discharged in the port an’ get rid o’t althegither. we
didn’t do much clearin’ that day, an’ had to remain the nicht at anchor;
but in the mornin’, braw an’ airly, an hour before sun-up, a man came
aboard wi’ an order, written to him from england, to receive a box
marked for one count dracula. sure eneuch the matter was one ready to
his hand. he had his papers a’ reet, an’ glad i was to be rid o’ the
dam’ thing, for i was beginnin’ masel’ to feel uneasy at it. if the deil
did have any luggage aboord the ship, i’m thinkin’ it was nane ither
than that same!”

“what was the name of the man who took it?” asked dr. van helsing with
restrained eagerness.

“i’ll be tellin’ ye quick!” he answered, and, stepping down to his
cabin, produced a receipt signed “immanuel hildesheim.” burgen-strasse
16 was the address. we found out that this was all the captain knew; so
with thanks we came away.

we found hildesheim in his office, a hebrew of rather the adelphi
theatre type, with a nose like a sheep, and a fez. his arguments were
pointed with specie--we doing the punctuation--and with a little
bargaining he told us what he knew. this turned out to be simple but
important. he had received a letter from mr. de ville of london, telling
him to receive, if possible before sunrise so as to avoid customs, a box
which would arrive at galatz in the _czarina catherine_. this he was to
give in charge to a certain petrof skinsky, who dealt with the slovaks
who traded down the river to the port. he had been paid for his work by
an english bank note, which had been duly cashed for gold at the danube
international bank. when skinsky had come to him, he had taken him to
the ship and handed over the box, so as to save porterage. that was all
he knew.

we then sought for skinsky, but were unable to find him. one of his
neighbours, who did not seem to bear him any affection, said that he had
gone away two days before, no one knew whither. this was corroborated by
his landlord, who had received by messenger the key of the house
together with the rent due, in english money. this had been between ten
and eleven o’clock last night. we were at a standstill again.

whilst we were talking one came running and breathlessly gasped out that
the body of skinsky had been found inside the wall of the churchyard of
st. peter, and that the throat had been torn open as if by some wild
animal. those we had been speaking with ran off to see the horror, the
women crying out “this is the work of a slovak!” we hurried away lest we
should have been in some way drawn into the affair, and so detained.

as we came home we could arrive at no definite conclusion. we were all
convinced that the box was on its way, by water, to somewhere; but where
that might be we would have to discover. with heavy hearts we came home
to the hotel to mina.

when we met together, the first thing was to consult as to taking mina
again into our confidence. things are getting desperate, and it is at
least a chance, though a hazardous one. as a preliminary step, i was
released from my promise to her.


_mina harker’s journal._

_30 october, evening._--they were so tired and worn out and dispirited
that there was nothing to be done till they had some rest; so i asked
them all to lie down for half an hour whilst i should enter everything
up to the moment. i feel so grateful to the man who invented the
“traveller’s” typewriter, and to mr. morris for getting this one for
me. i should have felt quite astray doing the work if i had to write
with a pen....

it is all done; poor dear, dear jonathan, what he must have suffered,
what must he be suffering now. he lies on the sofa hardly seeming to
breathe, and his whole body appears in collapse. his brows are knit; his
face is drawn with pain. poor fellow, maybe he is thinking, and i can
see his face all wrinkled up with the concentration of his thoughts. oh!
if i could only help at all.... i shall do what i can.

i have asked dr. van helsing, and he has got me all the papers that i
have not yet seen.... whilst they are resting, i shall go over all
carefully, and perhaps i may arrive at some conclusion. i shall try to
follow the professor’s example, and think without prejudice on the facts
before me....

       *       *       *       *       *

i do believe that under god’s providence i have made a discovery. i
shall get the maps and look over them....

       *       *       *       *       *

i am more than ever sure that i am right. my new conclusion is ready, so
i shall get our party together and read it. they can judge it; it is
well to be accurate, and every minute is precious.


_mina harker’s memorandum._

(entered in her journal.)

_ground of inquiry._--count dracula’s problem is to get back to his own
place.

(_a_) he must be _brought back_ by some one. this is evident; for had he
power to move himself as he wished he could go either as man, or wolf,
or bat, or in some other way. he evidently fears discovery or
interference, in the state of helplessness in which he must be--confined
as he is between dawn and sunset in his wooden box.

(_b_) _how is he to be taken?_--here a process of exclusions may help
us. by road, by rail, by water?

1. _by road._--there are endless difficulties, especially in leaving the
city.

(_x_) there are people; and people are curious, and investigate. a hint,
a surmise, a doubt as to what might be in the box, would destroy him.

(_y_) there are, or there may be, customs and octroi officers to pass.

(_z_) his pursuers might follow. this is his highest fear; and in order
to prevent his being betrayed he has repelled, so far as he can, even
his victim--me!

2. _by rail._--there is no one in charge of the box. it would have to
take its chance of being delayed; and delay would be fatal, with enemies
on the track. true, he might escape at night; but what would he be, if
left in a strange place with no refuge that he could fly to? this is not
what he intends; and he does not mean to risk it.

3. _by water._--here is the safest way, in one respect, but with most
danger in another. on the water he is powerless except at night; even
then he can only summon fog and storm and snow and his wolves. but were
he wrecked, the living water would engulf him, helpless; and he would
indeed be lost. he could have the vessel drive to land; but if it were
unfriendly land, wherein he was not free to move, his position would
still be desperate.

we know from the record that he was on the water; so what we have to do
is to ascertain _what_ water.

the first thing is to realise exactly what he has done as yet; we may,
then, get a light on what his later task is to be.

_firstly._--we must differentiate between what he did in london as part
of his general plan of action, when he was pressed for moments and had
to arrange as best he could.

_secondly_ we must see, as well as we can surmise it from the facts we
know of, what he has done here.

as to the first, he evidently intended to arrive at galatz, and sent
invoice to varna to deceive us lest we should ascertain his means of
exit from england; his immediate and sole purpose then was to escape.
the proof of this, is the letter of instructions sent to immanuel
hildesheim to clear and take away the box _before sunrise_. there is
also the instruction to petrof skinsky. these we must only guess at; but
there must have been some letter or message, since skinsky came to
hildesheim.

that, so far, his plans were successful we know. the _czarina catherine_
made a phenomenally quick journey--so much so that captain donelson’s
suspicions were aroused; but his superstition united with his canniness
played the count’s game for him, and he ran with his favouring wind
through fogs and all till he brought up blindfold at galatz. that the
count’s arrangements were well made, has been proved. hildesheim cleared
the box, took it off, and gave it to skinsky. skinsky took it--and here
we lose the trail. we only know that the box is somewhere on the water,
moving along. the customs and the octroi, if there be any, have been
avoided.

now we come to what the count must have done after his arrival--_on
land_, at galatz.

the box was given to skinsky before sunrise. at sunrise the count could
appear in his own form. here, we ask why skinsky was chosen at all to
aid in the work? in my husband’s diary, skinsky is mentioned as dealing
with the slovaks who trade down the river to the port; and the man’s
remark, that the murder was the work of a slovak, showed the general
feeling against his class. the count wanted isolation.

my surmise is, this: that in london the count decided to get back to his
castle by water, as the most safe and secret way. he was brought from
the castle by szgany, and probably they delivered their cargo to slovaks
who took the boxes to varna, for there they were shipped for london.
thus the count had knowledge of the persons who could arrange this
service. when the box was on land, before sunrise or after sunset, he
came out from his box, met skinsky and instructed him what to do as to
arranging the carriage of the box up some river. when this was done, and
he knew that all was in train, he blotted out his traces, as he thought,
by murdering his agent.

i have examined the map and find that the river most suitable for the
slovaks to have ascended is either the pruth or the sereth. i read in
the typescript that in my trance i heard cows low and water swirling
level with my ears and the creaking of wood. the count in his box, then,
was on a river in an open boat--propelled probably either by oars or
poles, for the banks are near and it is working against stream. there
would be no such sound if floating down stream.

of course it may not be either the sereth or the pruth, but we may
possibly investigate further. now of these two, the pruth is the more
easily navigated, but the sereth is, at fundu, joined by the bistritza
which runs up round the borgo pass. the loop it makes is manifestly as
close to dracula’s castle as can be got by water.


_mina harker’s journal--continued._

when i had done reading, jonathan took me in his arms and kissed me. the
others kept shaking me by both hands, and dr. van helsing said:--

“our dear madam mina is once more our teacher. her eyes have been where
we were blinded. now we are on the track once again, and this time we
may succeed. our enemy is at his most helpless; and if we can come on
him by day, on the water, our task will be over. he has a start, but he
is powerless to hasten, as he may not leave his box lest those who carry
him may suspect; for them to suspect would be to prompt them to throw
him in the stream where he perish. this he knows, and will not. now men,
to our council of war; for, here and now, we must plan what each and all
shall do.”

“i shall get a steam launch and follow him,” said lord godalming.

“and i, horses to follow on the bank lest by chance he land,” said mr.
morris.

“good!” said the professor, “both good. but neither must go alone. there
must be force to overcome force if need be; the slovak is strong and
rough, and he carries rude arms.” all the men smiled, for amongst them
they carried a small arsenal. said mr. morris:--

“i have brought some winchesters; they are pretty handy in a crowd, and
there may be wolves. the count, if you remember, took some other
precautions; he made some requisitions on others that mrs. harker could
not quite hear or understand. we must be ready at all points.” dr.
seward said:--

“i think i had better go with quincey. we have been accustomed to hunt
together, and we two, well armed, will be a match for whatever may come
along. you must not be alone, art. it may be necessary to fight the
slovaks, and a chance thrust--for i don’t suppose these fellows carry
guns--would undo all our plans. there must be no chances, this time; we
shall not rest until the count’s head and body have been separated, and
we are sure that he cannot re-incarnate.” he looked at jonathan as he
spoke, and jonathan looked at me. i could see that the poor dear was
torn about in his mind. of course he wanted to be with me; but then the
boat service would, most likely, be the one which would destroy the ...
the ... the ... vampire. (why did i hesitate to write the word?) he was
silent awhile, and during his silence dr. van helsing spoke:--

“friend jonathan, this is to you for twice reasons. first, because you
are young and brave and can fight, and all energies may be needed at the
last; and again that it is your right to destroy him--that--which has
wrought such woe to you and yours. be not afraid for madam mina; she
will be my care, if i may. i am old. my legs are not so quick to run as
once; and i am not used to ride so long or to pursue as need be, or to
fight with lethal weapons. but i can be of other service; i can fight in
other way. and i can die, if need be, as well as younger men. now let
me say that what i would is this: while you, my lord godalming and
friend jonathan go in your so swift little steamboat up the river, and
whilst john and quincey guard the bank where perchance he might be
landed, i will take madam mina right into the heart of the enemy’s
country. whilst the old fox is tied in his box, floating on the running
stream whence he cannot escape to land--where he dares not raise the lid
of his coffin-box lest his slovak carriers should in fear leave him to
perish--we shall go in the track where jonathan went,--from bistritz
over the borgo, and find our way to the castle of dracula. here, madam
mina’s hypnotic power will surely help, and we shall find our way--all
dark and unknown otherwise--after the first sunrise when we are near
that fateful place. there is much to be done, and other places to be
made sanctify, so that that nest of vipers be obliterated.” here
jonathan interrupted him hotly:--

“do you mean to say, professor van helsing, that you would bring mina,
in her sad case and tainted as she is with that devil’s illness, right
into the jaws of his death-trap? not for the world! not for heaven or
hell!” he became almost speechless for a minute, and then went on:--

“do you know what the place is? have you seen that awful den of hellish
infamy--with the very moonlight alive with grisly shapes, and every
speck of dust that whirls in the wind a devouring monster in embryo?
have you felt the vampire’s lips upon your throat?” here he turned to
me, and as his eyes lit on my forehead he threw up his arms with a cry:
“oh, my god, what have we done to have this terror upon us!” and he sank
down on the sofa in a collapse of misery. the professor’s voice, as he
spoke in clear, sweet tones, which seemed to vibrate in the air, calmed
us all:--

“oh, my friend, it is because i would save madam mina from that awful
place that i would go. god forbid that i should take her into that
place. there is work--wild work--to be done there, that her eyes may not
see. we men here, all save jonathan, have seen with their own eyes what
is to be done before that place can be purify. remember that we are in
terrible straits. if the count escape us this time--and he is strong and
subtle and cunning--he may choose to sleep him for a century, and then
in time our dear one”--he took my hand--“would come to him to keep him
company, and would be as those others that you, jonathan, saw. you have
told us of their gloating lips; you heard their ribald laugh as they
clutched the moving bag that the count threw to them. you shudder; and
well may it be. forgive me that i make you so much pain, but it is
necessary. my friend, is it not a dire need for the which i am giving,
possibly my life? if it were that any one went into that place to stay,
it is i who would have to go to keep them company.”

“do as you will,” said jonathan, with a sob that shook him all over, “we
are in the hands of god!”

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--oh, it did me good to see the way that these brave men worked.
how can women help loving men when they are so earnest, and so true, and
so brave! and, too, it made me think of the wonderful power of money!
what can it not do when it is properly applied; and what might it do
when basely used. i felt so thankful that lord godalming is rich, and
that both he and mr. morris, who also has plenty of money, are willing
to spend it so freely. for if they did not, our little expedition could
not start, either so promptly or so well equipped, as it will within
another hour. it is not three hours since it was arranged what part each
of us was to do; and now lord godalming and jonathan have a lovely steam
launch, with steam up ready to start at a moment’s notice. dr. seward
and mr. morris have half a dozen good horses, well appointed. we have
all the maps and appliances of various kinds that can be had. professor
van helsing and i are to leave by the 11:40 train to-night for veresti,
where we are to get a carriage to drive to the borgo pass. we are
bringing a good deal of ready money, as we are to buy a carriage and
horses. we shall drive ourselves, for we have no one whom we can trust
in the matter. the professor knows something of a great many languages,
so we shall get on all right. we have all got arms, even for me a
large-bore revolver; jonathan would not be happy unless i was armed like
the rest. alas! i cannot carry one arm that the rest do; the scar on my
forehead forbids that. dear dr. van helsing comforts me by telling me
that i am fully armed as there may be wolves; the weather is getting
colder every hour, and there are snow-flurries which come and go as
warnings.

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--it took all my courage to say good-bye to my darling. we may
never meet again. courage, mina! the professor is looking at you keenly;
his look is a warning. there must be no tears now--unless it may be that
god will let them fall in gladness.


_jonathan harker’s journal._

_october 30. night._--i am writing this in the light from the furnace
door of the steam launch: lord godalming is firing up. he is an
experienced hand at the work, as he has had for years a launch of his
own on the thames, and another on the norfolk broads. regarding our
plans, we finally decided that mina’s guess was correct, and that if any
waterway was chosen for the count’s escape back to his castle, the
sereth and then the bistritza at its junction, would be the one. we took
it, that somewhere about the 47th degree, north latitude, would be the
place chosen for the crossing the country between the river and the
carpathians. we have no fear in running at good speed up the river at
night; there is plenty of water, and the banks are wide enough apart to
make steaming, even in the dark, easy enough. lord godalming tells me to
sleep for a while, as it is enough for the present for one to be on
watch. but i cannot sleep--how can i with the terrible danger hanging
over my darling, and her going out into that awful place.... my only
comfort is that we are in the hands of god. only for that faith it would
be easier to die than to live, and so be quit of all the trouble. mr.
morris and dr. seward were off on their long ride before we started;
they are to keep up the right bank, far enough off to get on higher
lands where they can see a good stretch of river and avoid the following
of its curves. they have, for the first stages, two men to ride and lead
their spare horses--four in all, so as not to excite curiosity. when
they dismiss the men, which shall be shortly, they shall themselves look
after the horses. it may be necessary for us to join forces; if so they
can mount our whole party. one of the saddles has a movable horn, and
can be easily adapted for mina, if required.

it is a wild adventure we are on. here, as we are rushing along through
the darkness, with the cold from the river seeming to rise up and strike
us; with all the mysterious voices of the night around us, it all comes
home. we seem to be drifting into unknown places and unknown ways; into
a whole world of dark and dreadful things. godalming is shutting the
furnace door....

       *       *       *       *       *

_31 october._--still hurrying along. the day has come, and godalming is
sleeping. i am on watch. the morning is bitterly cold; the furnace heat
is grateful, though we have heavy fur coats. as yet we have passed only
a few open boats, but none of them had on board any box or package of
anything like the size of the one we seek. the men were scared every
time we turned our electric lamp on them, and fell on their knees and
prayed.

       *       *       *       *       *

_1 november, evening._--no news all day; we have found nothing of the
kind we seek. we have now passed into the bistritza; and if we are wrong
in our surmise our chance is gone. we have over-hauled every boat, big
and little. early this morning, one crew took us for a government boat,
and treated us accordingly. we saw in this a way of smoothing matters,
so at fundu, where the bistritza runs into the sereth, we got a
roumanian flag which we now fly conspicuously. with every boat which we
have over-hauled since then this trick has succeeded; we have had every
deference shown to us, and not once any objection to whatever we chose
to ask or do. some of the slovaks tell us that a big boat passed them,
going at more than usual speed as she had a double crew on board. this
was before they came to fundu, so they could not tell us whether the
boat turned into the bistritza or continued on up the sereth. at fundu
we could not hear of any such boat, so she must have passed there in the
night. i am feeling very sleepy; the cold is perhaps beginning to tell
upon me, and nature must have rest some time. godalming insists that he
shall keep the first watch. god bless him for all his goodness to poor
dear mina and me.

       *       *       *       *       *

_2 november, morning._--it is broad daylight. that good fellow would not
wake me. he says it would have been a sin to, for i slept peacefully and
was forgetting my trouble. it seems brutally selfish to me to have slept
so long, and let him watch all night; but he was quite right. i am a new
man this morning; and, as i sit here and watch him sleeping, i can do
all that is necessary both as to minding the engine, steering, and
keeping watch. i can feel that my strength and energy are coming back to
me. i wonder where mina is now, and van helsing. they should have got to
veresti about noon on wednesday. it would take them some time to get the
carriage and horses; so if they had started and travelled hard, they
would be about now at the borgo pass. god guide and help them! i am
afraid to think what may happen. if we could only go faster! but we
cannot; the engines are throbbing and doing their utmost. i wonder how
dr. seward and mr. morris are getting on. there seem to be endless
streams running down the mountains into this river, but as none of them
are very large--at present, at all events, though they are terrible
doubtless in winter and when the snow melts--the horsemen may not have
met much obstruction. i hope that before we get to strasba we may see
them; for if by that time we have not overtaken the count, it may be
necessary to take counsel together what to do next.


_dr. seward’s diary._

_2 november._--three days on the road. no news, and no time to write it
if there had been, for every moment is precious. we have had only the
rest needful for the horses; but we are both bearing it wonderfully.
those adventurous days of ours are turning up useful. we must push on;
we shall never feel happy till we get the launch in sight again.

       *       *       *       *       *

_3 november._--we heard at fundu that the launch had gone up the
bistritza. i wish it wasn’t so cold. there are signs of snow coming; and
if it falls heavy it will stop us. in such case we must get a sledge and
go on, russian fashion.

       *       *       *       *       *

_4 november._--to-day we heard of the launch having been detained by an
accident when trying to force a way up the rapids. the slovak boats get
up all right, by aid of a rope and steering with knowledge. some went up
only a few hours before. godalming is an amateur fitter himself, and
evidently it was he who put the launch in trim again. finally, they got
up the rapids all right, with local help, and are off on the chase
afresh. i fear that the boat is not any better for the accident; the
peasantry tell us that after she got upon smooth water again, she kept
stopping every now and again so long as she was in sight. we must push
on harder than ever; our help may be wanted soon.


_mina harker’s journal._

_31 october._--arrived at veresti at noon. the professor tells me that
this morning at dawn he could hardly hypnotise me at all, and that all i
could say was: “dark and quiet.” he is off now buying a carriage and
horses. he says that he will later on try to buy additional horses, so
that we may be able to change them on the way. we have something more
than 70 miles before us. the country is lovely, and most interesting; if
only we were under different conditions, how delightful it would be to
see it all. if jonathan and i were driving through it alone what a
pleasure it would be. to stop and see people, and learn something of
their life, and to fill our minds and memories with all the colour and
picturesqueness of the whole wild, beautiful country and the quaint
people! but, alas!--

       *       *       *       *       *

_later._--dr. van helsing has returned. he has got the carriage and
horses; we are to have some dinner, and to start in an hour. the
landlady is putting us up a huge basket of provisions; it seems enough
for a company of soldiers. the professor encourages her, and whispers to
me that it may be a week before we can get any good food again. he has
been shopping too, and has sent home such a wonderful lot of fur coats
and wraps, and all sorts of warm things. there will not be any chance of
our being cold.

       *       *       *       *       *

we shall soon be off. i am afraid to think what may happen to us. we are
truly in the hands of god. he alone knows what may be, and i pray him,
with all the strength of my sad and humble soul, that he will watch over
my beloved husband; that whatever may happen, jonathan may know that i
loved him and honoured him more than i can say, and that my latest and
truest thought will be always for him.




chapter xxvii

mina harker’s journal


_1 november._--all day long we have travelled, and at a good speed. the
horses seem to know that they are being kindly treated, for they go
willingly their full stage at best speed. we have now had so many
changes and find the same thing so constantly that we are encouraged to
think that the journey will be an easy one. dr. van helsing is laconic;
he tells the farmers that he is hurrying to bistritz, and pays them well
to make the exchange of horses. we get hot soup, or coffee, or tea; and
off we go. it is a lovely country; full of beauties of all imaginable
kinds, and the people are brave, and strong, and simple, and seem full
of nice qualities. they are _very, very_ superstitious. in the first
house where we stopped, when the woman who served us saw the scar on my
forehead, she crossed herself and put out two fingers towards me, to
keep off the evil eye. i believe they went to the trouble of putting an
extra amount of garlic into our food; and i can’t abide garlic. ever
since then i have taken care not to take off my hat or veil, and so have
escaped their suspicions. we are travelling fast, and as we have no
driver with us to carry tales, we go ahead of scandal; but i daresay
that fear of the evil eye will follow hard behind us all the way. the
professor seems tireless; all day he would not take any rest, though he
made me sleep for a long spell. at sunset time he hypnotised me, and he
says that i answered as usual “darkness, lapping water and creaking
wood”; so our enemy is still on the river. i am afraid to think of
jonathan, but somehow i have now no fear for him, or for myself. i write
this whilst we wait in a farmhouse for the horses to be got ready. dr.
van helsing is sleeping. poor dear, he looks very tired and old and
grey, but his mouth is set as firmly as a conqueror’s; even in his sleep
he is instinct with resolution. when we have well started i must make
him rest whilst i drive. i shall tell him that we have days before us,
and we must not break down when most of all his strength will be
needed.... all is ready; we are off shortly.

       *       *       *       *       *

_2 november, morning._--i was successful, and we took turns driving all
night; now the day is on us, bright though cold. there is a strange
heaviness in the air--i say heaviness for want of a better word; i mean
that it oppresses us both. it is very cold, and only our warm furs keep
us comfortable. at dawn van helsing hypnotised me; he says i answered
“darkness, creaking wood and roaring water,” so the river is changing as
they ascend. i do hope that my darling will not run any chance of
danger--more than need be; but we are in god’s hands.

       *       *       *       *       *

_2 november, night._--all day long driving. the country gets wilder as
we go, and the great spurs of the carpathians, which at veresti seemed
so far from us and so low on the horizon, now seem to gather round us
and tower in front. we both seem in good spirits; i think we make an
effort each to cheer the other; in the doing so we cheer ourselves. dr.
van helsing says that by morning we shall reach the borgo pass. the
houses are very few here now, and the professor says that the last horse
we got will have to go on with us, as we may not be able to change. he
got two in addition to the two we changed, so that now we have a rude
four-in-hand. the dear horses are patient and good, and they give us no
trouble. we are not worried with other travellers, and so even i can
drive. we shall get to the pass in daylight; we do not want to arrive
before. so we take it easy, and have each a long rest in turn. oh, what
will to-morrow bring to us? we go to seek the place where my poor
darling suffered so much. god grant that we may be guided aright, and
that he will deign to watch over my husband and those dear to us both,
and who are in such deadly peril. as for me, i am not worthy in his
sight. alas! i am unclean to his eyes, and shall be until he may deign
to let me stand forth in his sight as one of those who have not incurred
his wrath.


_memorandum by abraham van helsing._

_4 november._--this to my old and true friend john seward, m.d., of
purfleet, london, in case i may not see him. it may explain. it is
morning, and i write by a fire which all the night i have kept
alive--madam mina aiding me. it is cold, cold; so cold that the grey
heavy sky is full of snow, which when it falls will settle for all
winter as the ground is hardening to receive it. it seems to have
affected madam mina; she has been so heavy of head all day that she was
not like herself. she sleeps, and sleeps, and sleeps! she who is usual
so alert, have done literally nothing all the day; she even have lost
her appetite. she make no entry into her little diary, she who write so
faithful at every pause. something whisper to me that all is not well.
however, to-night she is more _vif_. her long sleep all day have refresh
and restore her, for now she is all sweet and bright as ever. at sunset
i try to hypnotise her, but alas! with no effect; the power has grown
less and less with each day, and to-night it fail me altogether. well,
god’s will be done--whatever it may be, and whithersoever it may lead!

now to the historical, for as madam mina write not in her stenography, i
must, in my cumbrous old fashion, that so each day of us may not go
unrecorded.

we got to the borgo pass just after sunrise yesterday morning. when i
saw the signs of the dawn i got ready for the hypnotism. we stopped our
carriage, and got down so that there might be no disturbance. i made a
couch with furs, and madam mina, lying down, yield herself as usual, but
more slow and more short time than ever, to the hypnotic sleep. as
before, came the answer: “darkness and the swirling of water.” then she
woke, bright and radiant and we go on our way and soon reach the pass.
at this time and place, she become all on fire with zeal; some new
guiding power be in her manifested, for she point to a road and say:--

“this is the way.”

“how know you it?” i ask.

“of course i know it,” she answer, and with a pause, add: “have not my
jonathan travelled it and wrote of his travel?”

at first i think somewhat strange, but soon i see that there be only one
such by-road. it is used but little, and very different from the coach
road from the bukovina to bistritz, which is more wide and hard, and
more of use.

so we came down this road; when we meet other ways--not always were we
sure that they were roads at all, for they be neglect and light snow
have fallen--the horses know and they only. i give rein to them, and
they go on so patient. by-and-by we find all the things which jonathan
have note in that wonderful diary of him. then we go on for long, long
hours and hours. at the first, i tell madam mina to sleep; she try, and
she succeed. she sleep all the time; till at the last, i feel myself to
suspicious grow, and attempt to wake her. but she sleep on, and i may
not wake her though i try. i do not wish to try too hard lest i harm
her; for i know that she have suffer much, and sleep at times be
all-in-all to her. i think i drowse myself, for all of sudden i feel
guilt, as though i have done something; i find myself bolt up, with the
reins in my hand, and the good horses go along jog, jog, just as ever. i
look down and find madam mina still sleep. it is now not far off sunset
time, and over the snow the light of the sun flow in big yellow flood,
so that we throw great long shadow on where the mountain rise so steep.
for we are going up, and up; and all is oh! so wild and rocky, as though
it were the end of the world.

then i arouse madam mina. this time she wake with not much trouble, and
then i try to put her to hypnotic sleep. but she sleep not, being as
though i were not. still i try and try, till all at once i find her and
myself in dark; so i look round, and find that the sun have gone down.
madam mina laugh, and i turn and look at her. she is now quite awake,
and look so well as i never saw her since that night at carfax when we
first enter the count’s house. i am amaze, and not at ease then; but she
is so bright and tender and thoughtful for me that i forget all fear. i
light a fire, for we have brought supply of wood with us, and she
prepare food while i undo the horses and set them, tethered in shelter,
to feed. then when i return to the fire she have my supper ready. i go
to help her; but she smile, and tell me that she have eat already--that
she was so hungry that she would not wait. i like it not, and i have
grave doubts; but i fear to affright her, and so i am silent of it. she
help me and i eat alone; and then we wrap in fur and lie beside the
fire, and i tell her to sleep while i watch. but presently i forget all
of watching; and when i sudden remember that i watch, i find her lying
quiet, but awake, and looking at me with so bright eyes. once, twice
more the same occur, and i get much sleep till before morning. when i
wake i try to hypnotise her; but alas! though she shut her eyes
obedient, she may not sleep. the sun rise up, and up, and up; and then
sleep come to her too late, but so heavy that she will not wake. i have
to lift her up, and place her sleeping in the carriage when i have
harnessed the horses and made all ready. madam still sleep, and she look
in her sleep more healthy and more redder than before. and i like it
not. and i am afraid, afraid, afraid!--i am afraid of all things--even
to think but i must go on my way. the stake we play for is life and
death, or more than these, and we must not flinch.

       *       *       *       *       *

_5 november, morning._--let me be accurate in everything, for though you
and i have seen some strange things together, you may at the first think
that i, van helsing, am mad--that the many horrors and the so long
strain on nerves has at the last turn my brain.

all yesterday we travel, ever getting closer to the mountains, and
moving into a more and more wild and desert land. there are great,
frowning precipices and much falling water, and nature seem to have held
sometime her carnival. madam mina still sleep and sleep; and though i
did have hunger and appeased it, i could not waken her--even for food. i
began to fear that the fatal spell of the place was upon her, tainted as
she is with that vampire baptism. “well,” said i to myself, “if it be
that she sleep all the day, it shall also be that i do not sleep at
night.” as we travel on the rough road, for a road of an ancient and
imperfect kind there was, i held down my head and slept. again i waked
with a sense of guilt and of time passed, and found madam mina still
sleeping, and the sun low down. but all was indeed changed; the frowning
mountains seemed further away, and we were near the top of a
steep-rising hill, on summit of which was such a castle as jonathan tell
of in his diary. at once i exulted and feared; for now, for good or ill,
the end was near.

i woke madam mina, and again tried to hypnotise her; but alas!
unavailing till too late. then, ere the great dark came upon us--for
even after down-sun the heavens reflected the gone sun on the snow, and
all was for a time in a great twilight--i took out the horses and fed
them in what shelter i could. then i make a fire; and near it i make
madam mina, now awake and more charming than ever, sit comfortable amid
her rugs. i got ready food: but she would not eat, simply saying that
she had not hunger. i did not press her, knowing her unavailingness. but
i myself eat, for i must needs now be strong for all. then, with the
fear on me of what might be, i drew a ring so big for her comfort, round
where madam mina sat; and over the ring i passed some of the wafer, and
i broke it fine so that all was well guarded. she sat still all the
time--so still as one dead; and she grew whiter and ever whiter till the
snow was not more pale; and no word she said. but when i drew near, she
clung to me, and i could know that the poor soul shook her from head to
feet with a tremor that was pain to feel. i said to her presently, when
she had grown more quiet:--

“will you not come over to the fire?” for i wished to make a test of
what she could. she rose obedient, but when she have made a step she
stopped, and stood as one stricken.

“why not go on?” i asked. she shook her head, and, coming back, sat
down in her place. then, looking at me with open eyes, as of one waked
from sleep, she said simply:--

“i cannot!” and remained silent. i rejoiced, for i knew that what she
could not, none of those that we dreaded could. though there might be
danger to her body, yet her soul was safe!

presently the horses began to scream, and tore at their tethers till i
came to them and quieted them. when they did feel my hands on them, they
whinnied low as in joy, and licked at my hands and were quiet for a
time. many times through the night did i come to them, till it arrive to
the cold hour when all nature is at lowest; and every time my coming was
with quiet of them. in the cold hour the fire began to die, and i was
about stepping forth to replenish it, for now the snow came in flying
sweeps and with it a chill mist. even in the dark there was a light of
some kind, as there ever is over snow; and it seemed as though the
snow-flurries and the wreaths of mist took shape as of women with
trailing garments. all was in dead, grim silence only that the horses
whinnied and cowered, as if in terror of the worst. i began to
fear--horrible fears; but then came to me the sense of safety in that
ring wherein i stood. i began, too, to think that my imaginings were of
the night, and the gloom, and the unrest that i have gone through, and
all the terrible anxiety. it was as though my memories of all jonathan’s
horrid experience were befooling me; for the snow flakes and the mist
began to wheel and circle round, till i could get as though a shadowy
glimpse of those women that would have kissed him. and then the horses
cowered lower and lower, and moaned in terror as men do in pain. even
the madness of fright was not to them, so that they could break away. i
feared for my dear madam mina when these weird figures drew near and
circled round. i looked at her, but she sat calm, and smiled at me; when
i would have stepped to the fire to replenish it, she caught me and held
me back, and whispered, like a voice that one hears in a dream, so low
it was:--

“no! no! do not go without. here you are safe!” i turned to her, and
looking in her eyes, said:--

“but you? it is for you that i fear!” whereat she laughed--a laugh, low
and unreal, and said:--

“fear for _me_! why fear for me? none safer in all the world from them
than i am,” and as i wondered at the meaning of her words, a puff of
wind made the flame leap up, and i see the red scar on her forehead.
then, alas! i knew. did i not, i would soon have learned, for the
wheeling figures of mist and snow came closer, but keeping ever without
the holy circle. then they began to materialise till--if god have not
take away my reason, for i saw it through my eyes--there were before me
in actual flesh the same three women that jonathan saw in the room, when
they would have kissed his throat. i knew the swaying round forms, the
bright hard eyes, the white teeth, the ruddy colour, the voluptuous
lips. they smiled ever at poor dear madam mina; and as their laugh came
through the silence of the night, they twined their arms and pointed to
her, and said in those so sweet tingling tones that jonathan said were
of the intolerable sweetness of the water-glasses:--

“come, sister. come to us. come! come!” in fear i turned to my poor
madam mina, and my heart with gladness leapt like flame; for oh! the
terror in her sweet eyes, the repulsion, the horror, told a story to my
heart that was all of hope. god be thanked she was not, yet, of them. i
seized some of the firewood which was by me, and holding out some of the
wafer, advanced on them towards the fire. they drew back before me, and
laughed their low horrid laugh. i fed the fire, and feared them not; for
i knew that we were safe within our protections. they could not
approach, me, whilst so armed, nor madam mina whilst she remained within
the ring, which she could not leave no more than they could enter. the
horses had ceased to moan, and lay still on the ground; the snow fell on
them softly, and they grew whiter. i knew that there was for the poor
beasts no more of terror.

and so we remained till the red of the dawn to fall through the
snow-gloom. i was desolate and afraid, and full of woe and terror; but
when that beautiful sun began to climb the horizon life was to me again.
at the first coming of the dawn the horrid figures melted in the
whirling mist and snow; the wreaths of transparent gloom moved away
towards the castle, and were lost.

instinctively, with the dawn coming, i turned to madam mina, intending
to hypnotise her; but she lay in a deep and sudden sleep, from which i
could not wake her. i tried to hypnotise through her sleep, but she made
no response, none at all; and the day broke. i fear yet to stir. i have
made my fire and have seen the horses, they are all dead. to-day i have
much to do here, and i keep waiting till the sun is up high; for there
may be places where i must go, where that sunlight, though snow and mist
obscure it, will be to me a safety.

i will strengthen me with breakfast, and then i will to my terrible
work. madam mina still sleeps; and, god be thanked! she is calm in her
sleep....


_jonathan harker’s journal._

_4 november, evening._--the accident to the launch has been a terrible
thing for us. only for it we should have overtaken the boat long ago;
and by now my dear mina would have been free. i fear to think of her,
off on the wolds near that horrid place. we have got horses, and we
follow on the track. i note this whilst godalming is getting ready. we
have our arms. the szgany must look out if they mean fight. oh, if only
morris and seward were with us. we must only hope! if i write no more
good-bye, mina! god bless and keep you.


_dr. seward’s diary._

_5 november._--with the dawn we saw the body of szgany before us dashing
away from the river with their leiter-wagon. they surrounded it in a
cluster, and hurried along as though beset. the snow is falling lightly
and there is a strange excitement in the air. it may be our own
feelings, but the depression is strange. far off i hear the howling of
wolves; the snow brings them down from the mountains, and there are
dangers to all of us, and from all sides. the horses are nearly ready,
and we are soon off. we ride to death of some one. god alone knows who,
or where, or what, or when, or how it may be....


_dr. van helsing’s memorandum._

_5 november, afternoon._--i am at least sane. thank god for that mercy
at all events, though the proving it has been dreadful. when i left
madam mina sleeping within the holy circle, i took my way to the castle.
the blacksmith hammer which i took in the carriage from veresti was
useful; though the doors were all open i broke them off the rusty
hinges, lest some ill-intent or ill-chance should close them, so that
being entered i might not get out. jonathan’s bitter experience served
me here. by memory of his diary i found my way to the old chapel, for i
knew that here my work lay. the air was oppressive; it seemed as if
there was some sulphurous fume, which at times made me dizzy. either
there was a roaring in my ears or i heard afar off the howl of wolves.
then i bethought me of my dear madam mina, and i was in terrible plight.
the dilemma had me between his horns.

her, i had not dare to take into this place, but left safe from the
vampire in that holy circle; and yet even there would be the wolf! i
resolve me that my work lay here, and that as to the wolves we must
submit, if it were god’s will. at any rate it was only death and
freedom beyond. so did i choose for her. had it but been for myself the
choice had been easy, the maw of the wolf were better to rest in than
the grave of the vampire! so i make my choice to go on with my work.

i knew that there were at least three graves to find--graves that are
inhabit; so i search, and search, and i find one of them. she lay in her
vampire sleep, so full of life and voluptuous beauty that i shudder as
though i have come to do murder. ah, i doubt not that in old time, when
such things were, many a man who set forth to do such a task as mine,
found at the last his heart fail him, and then his nerve. so he delay,
and delay, and delay, till the mere beauty and the fascination of the
wanton un-dead have hypnotise him; and he remain on and on, till sunset
come, and the vampire sleep be over. then the beautiful eyes of the fair
woman open and look love, and the voluptuous mouth present to a
kiss--and man is weak. and there remain one more victim in the vampire
fold; one more to swell the grim and grisly ranks of the un-dead!...

there is some fascination, surely, when i am moved by the mere presence
of such an one, even lying as she lay in a tomb fretted with age and
heavy with the dust of centuries, though there be that horrid odour such
as the lairs of the count have had. yes, i was moved--i, van helsing,
with all my purpose and with my motive for hate--i was moved to a
yearning for delay which seemed to paralyse my faculties and to clog my
very soul. it may have been that the need of natural sleep, and the
strange oppression of the air were beginning to overcome me. certain it
was that i was lapsing into sleep, the open-eyed sleep of one who yields
to a sweet fascination, when there came through the snow-stilled air a
long, low wail, so full of woe and pity that it woke me like the sound
of a clarion. for it was the voice of my dear madam mina that i heard.

then i braced myself again to my horrid task, and found by wrenching
away tomb-tops one other of the sisters, the other dark one. i dared not
pause to look on her as i had on her sister, lest once more i should
begin to be enthrall; but i go on searching until, presently, i find in
a high great tomb as if made to one much beloved that other fair sister
which, like jonathan i had seen to gather herself out of the atoms of
the mist. she was so fair to look on, so radiantly beautiful, so
exquisitely voluptuous, that the very instinct of man in me, which calls
some of my sex to love and to protect one of hers, made my head whirl
with new emotion. but god be thanked, that soul-wail of my dear madam
mina had not died out of my ears; and, before the spell could be wrought
further upon me, i had nerved myself to my wild work. by this time i had
searched all the tombs in the chapel, so far as i could tell; and as
there had been only three of these un-dead phantoms around us in the
night, i took it that there were no more of active un-dead existent.
there was one great tomb more lordly than all the rest; huge it was, and
nobly proportioned. on it was but one word

                                dracula.

this then was the un-dead home of the king-vampire, to whom so many more
were due. its emptiness spoke eloquent to make certain what i knew.
before i began to restore these women to their dead selves through my
awful work, i laid in dracula’s tomb some of the wafer, and so banished
him from it, un-dead, for ever.

then began my terrible task, and i dreaded it. had it been but one, it
had been easy, comparative. but three! to begin twice more after i had
been through a deed of horror; for if it was terrible with the sweet
miss lucy, what would it not be with these strange ones who had survived
through centuries, and who had been strengthened by the passing of the
years; who would, if they could, have fought for their foul lives....

oh, my friend john, but it was butcher work; had i not been nerved by
thoughts of other dead, and of the living over whom hung such a pall of
fear, i could not have gone on. i tremble and tremble even yet, though
till all was over, god be thanked, my nerve did stand. had i not seen
the repose in the first place, and the gladness that stole over it just
ere the final dissolution came, as realisation that the soul had been
won, i could not have gone further with my butchery. i could not have
endured the horrid screeching as the stake drove home; the plunging of
writhing form, and lips of bloody foam. i should have fled in terror and
left my work undone. but it is over! and the poor souls, i can pity them
now and weep, as i think of them placid each in her full sleep of death
for a short moment ere fading. for, friend john, hardly had my knife
severed the head of each, before the whole body began to melt away and
crumble in to its native dust, as though the death that should have come
centuries agone had at last assert himself and say at once and loud “i
am here!”

before i left the castle i so fixed its entrances that never more can
the count enter there un-dead.

when i stepped into the circle where madam mina slept, she woke from her
sleep, and, seeing, me, cried out in pain that i had endured too much.

“come!” she said, “come away from this awful place! let us go to meet my
husband who is, i know, coming towards us.” she was looking thin and
pale and weak; but her eyes were pure and glowed with fervour. i was
glad to see her paleness and her illness, for my mind was full of the
fresh horror of that ruddy vampire sleep.

and so with trust and hope, and yet full of fear, we go eastward to meet
our friends--and _him_--whom madam mina tell me that she _know_ are
coming to meet us.


_mina harker’s journal._

_6 november._--it was late in the afternoon when the professor and i
took our way towards the east whence i knew jonathan was coming. we did
not go fast, though the way was steeply downhill, for we had to take
heavy rugs and wraps with us; we dared not face the possibility of being
left without warmth in the cold and the snow. we had to take some of our
provisions, too, for we were in a perfect desolation, and, so far as we
could see through the snowfall, there was not even the sign of
habitation. when we had gone about a mile, i was tired with the heavy
walking and sat down to rest. then we looked back and saw where the
clear line of dracula’s castle cut the sky; for we were so deep under
the hill whereon it was set that the angle of perspective of the
carpathian mountains was far below it. we saw it in all its grandeur,
perched a thousand feet on the summit of a sheer precipice, and with
seemingly a great gap between it and the steep of the adjacent mountain
on any side. there was something wild and uncanny about the place. we
could hear the distant howling of wolves. they were far off, but the
sound, even though coming muffled through the deadening snowfall, was
full of terror. i knew from the way dr. van helsing was searching about
that he was trying to seek some strategic point, where we would be less
exposed in case of attack. the rough roadway still led downwards; we
could trace it through the drifted snow.

in a little while the professor signalled to me, so i got up and joined
him. he had found a wonderful spot, a sort of natural hollow in a rock,
with an entrance like a doorway between two boulders. he took me by the
hand and drew me in: “see!” he said, “here you will be in shelter; and
if the wolves do come i can meet them one by one.” he brought in our
furs, and made a snug nest for me, and got out some provisions and
forced them upon me. but i could not eat; to even try to do so was
repulsive to me, and, much as i would have liked to please him, i could
not bring myself to the attempt. he looked very sad, but did not
reproach me. taking his field-glasses from the case, he stood on the top
of the rock, and began to search the horizon. suddenly he called out:--

“look! madam mina, look! look!” i sprang up and stood beside him on the
rock; he handed me his glasses and pointed. the snow was now falling
more heavily, and swirled about fiercely, for a high wind was beginning
to blow. however, there were times when there were pauses between the
snow flurries and i could see a long way round. from the height where we
were it was possible to see a great distance; and far off, beyond the
white waste of snow, i could see the river lying like a black ribbon in
kinks and curls as it wound its way. straight in front of us and not far
off--in fact, so near that i wondered we had not noticed before--came a
group of mounted men hurrying along. in the midst of them was a cart, a
long leiter-wagon which swept from side to side, like a dog’s tail
wagging, with each stern inequality of the road. outlined against the
snow as they were, i could see from the men’s clothes that they were
peasants or gypsies of some kind.

on the cart was a great square chest. my heart leaped as i saw it, for i
felt that the end was coming. the evening was now drawing close, and
well i knew that at sunset the thing, which was till then imprisoned
there, would take new freedom and could in any of many forms elude all
pursuit. in fear i turned to the professor; to my consternation,
however, he was not there. an instant later, i saw him below me. round
the rock he had drawn a circle, such as we had found shelter in last
night. when he had completed it he stood beside me again, saying:--

“at least you shall be safe here from _him_!” he took the glasses from
me, and at the next lull of the snow swept the whole space below us.
“see,” he said, “they come quickly; they are flogging the horses, and
galloping as hard as they can.” he paused and went on in a hollow
voice:--

“they are racing for the sunset. we may be too late. god’s will be
done!” down came another blinding rush of driving snow, and the whole
landscape was blotted out. it soon passed, however, and once more his
glasses were fixed on the plain. then came a sudden cry:--

“look! look! look! see, two horsemen follow fast, coming up from the
south. it must be quincey and john. take the glass. look before the snow
blots it all out!” i took it and looked. the two men might be dr. seward
and mr. morris. i knew at all events that neither of them was jonathan.
at the same time i _knew_ that jonathan was not far off; looking around
i saw on the north side of the coming party two other men, riding at
break-neck speed. one of them i knew was jonathan, and the other i took,
of course, to be lord godalming. they, too, were pursuing the party with
the cart. when i told the professor he shouted in glee like a schoolboy,
and, after looking intently till a snow fall made sight impossible, he
laid his winchester rifle ready for use against the boulder at the
opening of our shelter. “they are all converging,” he said. “when the
time comes we shall have gypsies on all sides.” i got out my revolver
ready to hand, for whilst we were speaking the howling of wolves came
louder and closer. when the snow storm abated a moment we looked again.
it was strange to see the snow falling in such heavy flakes close to us,
and beyond, the sun shining more and more brightly as it sank down
towards the far mountain tops. sweeping the glass all around us i could
see here and there dots moving singly and in twos and threes and larger
numbers--the wolves were gathering for their prey.

every instant seemed an age whilst we waited. the wind came now in
fierce bursts, and the snow was driven with fury as it swept upon us in
circling eddies. at times we could not see an arm’s length before us;
but at others, as the hollow-sounding wind swept by us, it seemed to
clear the air-space around us so that we could see afar off. we had of
late been so accustomed to watch for sunrise and sunset, that we knew
with fair accuracy when it would be; and we knew that before long the
sun would set. it was hard to believe that by our watches it was less
than an hour that we waited in that rocky shelter before the various
bodies began to converge close upon us. the wind came now with fiercer
and more bitter sweeps, and more steadily from the north. it seemingly
had driven the snow clouds from us, for, with only occasional bursts,
the snow fell. we could distinguish clearly the individuals of each
party, the pursued and the pursuers. strangely enough those pursued did
not seem to realise, or at least to care, that they were pursued; they
seemed, however, to hasten with redoubled speed as the sun dropped lower
and lower on the mountain tops.

closer and closer they drew. the professor and i crouched down behind
our rock, and held our weapons ready; i could see that he was determined
that they should not pass. one and all were quite unaware of our
presence.

all at once two voices shouted out to: “halt!” one was my jonathan’s,
raised in a high key of passion; the other mr. morris’ strong resolute
tone of quiet command. the gypsies may not have known the language, but
there was no mistaking the tone, in whatever tongue the words were
spoken. instinctively they reined in, and at the instant lord godalming
and jonathan dashed up at one side and dr. seward and mr. morris on the
other. the leader of the gypsies, a splendid-looking fellow who sat his
horse like a centaur, waved them back, and in a fierce voice gave to his
companions some word to proceed. they lashed the horses which sprang
forward; but the four men raised their winchester rifles, and in an
unmistakable way commanded them to stop. at the same moment dr. van
helsing and i rose behind the rock and pointed our weapons at them.
seeing that they were surrounded the men tightened their reins and drew
up. the leader turned to them and gave a word at which every man of the
gypsy party drew what weapon he carried, knife or pistol, and held
himself in readiness to attack. issue was joined in an instant.

the leader, with a quick movement of his rein, threw his horse out in
front, and pointing first to the sun--now close down on the hill
tops--and then to the castle, said something which i did not understand.
for answer, all four men of our party threw themselves from their horses
and dashed towards the cart. i should have felt terrible fear at seeing
jonathan in such danger, but that the ardour of battle must have been
upon me as well as the rest of them; i felt no fear, but only a wild,
surging desire to do something. seeing the quick movement of our
parties, the leader of the gypsies gave a command; his men instantly
formed round the cart in a sort of undisciplined endeavour, each one
shouldering and pushing the other in his eagerness to carry out the
order.

in the midst of this i could see that jonathan on one side of the ring
of men, and quincey on the other, were forcing a way to the cart; it was
evident that they were bent on finishing their task before the sun
should set. nothing seemed to stop or even to hinder them. neither the
levelled weapons nor the flashing knives of the gypsies in front, nor
the howling of the wolves behind, appeared to even attract their
attention. jonathan’s impetuosity, and the manifest singleness of his
purpose, seemed to overawe those in front of him; instinctively they
cowered, aside and let him pass. in an instant he had jumped upon the
cart, and, with a strength which seemed incredible, raised the great
box, and flung it over the wheel to the ground. in the meantime, mr.
morris had had to use force to pass through his side of the ring of
szgany. all the time i had been breathlessly watching jonathan i had,
with the tail of my eye, seen him pressing desperately forward, and had
seen the knives of the gypsies flash as he won a way through them, and
they cut at him. he had parried with his great bowie knife, and at first
i thought that he too had come through in safety; but as he sprang
beside jonathan, who had by now jumped from the cart, i could see that
with his left hand he was clutching at his side, and that the blood was
spurting through his fingers. he did not delay notwithstanding this, for
as jonathan, with desperate energy, attacked one end of the chest,
attempting to prize off the lid with his great kukri knife, he attacked
the other frantically with his bowie. under the efforts of both men the
lid began to yield; the nails drew with a quick screeching sound, and
the top of the box was thrown back.

by this time the gypsies, seeing themselves covered by the winchesters,
and at the mercy of lord godalming and dr. seward, had given in and made
no resistance. the sun was almost down on the mountain tops, and the
shadows of the whole group fell long upon the snow. i saw the count
lying within the box upon the earth, some of which the rude falling from
the cart had scattered over him. he was deathly pale, just like a waxen
image, and the red eyes glared with the horrible vindictive look which i
knew too well.

as i looked, the eyes saw the sinking sun, and the look of hate in them
turned to triumph.

but, on the instant, came the sweep and flash of jonathan’s great knife.
i shrieked as i saw it shear through the throat; whilst at the same
moment mr. morris’s bowie knife plunged into the heart.

it was like a miracle; but before our very eyes, and almost in the
drawing of a breath, the whole body crumbled into dust and passed from
our sight.

i shall be glad as long as i live that even in that moment of final
dissolution, there was in the face a look of peace, such as i never
could have imagined might have rested there.

the castle of dracula now stood out against the red sky, and every stone
of its broken battlements was articulated against the light of the
setting sun.

the gypsies, taking us as in some way the cause of the extraordinary
disappearance of the dead man, turned, without a word, and rode away as
if for their lives. those who were unmounted jumped upon the
leiter-wagon and shouted to the horsemen not to desert them. the wolves,
which had withdrawn to a safe distance, followed in their wake, leaving
us alone.

mr. morris, who had sunk to the ground, leaned on his elbow, holding his
hand pressed to his side; the blood still gushed through his fingers. i
flew to him, for the holy circle did not now keep me back; so did the
two doctors. jonathan knelt behind him and the wounded man laid back his
head on his shoulder. with a sigh he took, with a feeble effort, my hand
in that of his own which was unstained. he must have seen the anguish of
my heart in my face, for he smiled at me and said:--

“i am only too happy to have been of any service! oh, god!” he cried
suddenly, struggling up to a sitting posture and pointing to me, “it was
worth for this to die! look! look!”

the sun was now right down upon the mountain top, and the red gleams
fell upon my face, so that it was bathed in rosy light. with one impulse
the men sank on their knees and a deep and earnest “amen” broke from all
as their eyes followed the pointing of his finger. the dying man
spoke:--

“now god be thanked that all has not been in vain! see! the snow is not
more stainless than her forehead! the curse has passed away!”

and, to our bitter grief, with a smile and in silence, he died, a
gallant gentleman.




                                  note


seven years ago we all went through the flames; and the happiness of
some of us since then is, we think, well worth the pain we endured. it
is an added joy to mina and to me that our boy’s birthday is the same
day as that on which quincey morris died. his mother holds, i know, the
secret belief that some of our brave friend’s spirit has passed into
him. his bundle of names links all our little band of men together; but
we call him quincey.

in the summer of this year we made a journey to transylvania, and went
over the old ground which was, and is, to us so full of vivid and
terrible memories. it was almost impossible to believe that the things
which we had seen with our own eyes and heard with our own ears were
living truths. every trace of all that had been was blotted out. the
castle stood as before, reared high above a waste of desolation.

when we got home we were talking of the old time--which we could all
look back on without despair, for godalming and seward are both happily
married. i took the papers from the safe where they had been ever since
our return so long ago. we were struck with the fact, that in all the
mass of material of which the record is composed, there is hardly one
authentic document; nothing but a mass of typewriting, except the later
note-books of mina and seward and myself, and van helsing’s memorandum.
we could hardly ask any one, even did we wish to, to accept these as
proofs of so wild a story. van helsing summed it all up as he said, with
our boy on his knee:--

“we want no proofs; we ask none to believe us! this boy will some day
know what a brave and gallant woman his mother is. already he knows her
sweetness and loving care; later on he will understand how some men so
loved her, that they did dare much for her sake.”

jonathan harker.

                                the end

       *       *       *       *       *

                       _there’s more to follow!_

     more stories of the sort you like; more, probably, by the author of
     this one; more than 500 titles all told by writers of world-wide
     reputation, in the authors’ alphabetical list which you will find
     on the _reverse side_ of the wrapper of this book. look it over
     before you lay it aside. there are books here you are sure to
     want--some, possibly, that you have _always_ wanted.

     it is a _selected_ list; every book in it has achieved a certain
     measure of _success_.

     the grosset & dunlap list is not only the greatest index of good
     fiction available, it represents in addition a generally accepted
     standard of value. it will pay you to

                _look on the other side of the wrapper!_

     _in case the wrapper is lost write to the publishers for a complete
     catalog_

       *       *       *       *       *

detective stories by j. s. fletcher

may be had wherever books are sold. ask for grosset & dunlap’s list


the secret of the barbican

the annexation society

the wolves and the lamb

green ink

the king versus wargrave

the lost mr. linthwaite

the mill of many windows

the heaven-kissed hill

the middle temple murder

ravensdene court

the rayner-slade amalgamation

the safety pin

the secret way

the valley of headstrong men

_ask for complete free list of g. & d. popular copyrighted fiction_

grosset & dunlap, _publishers_, new york






